September 11, 2023
Submitted via www.regulations.gov
Chiquita Brooks-LaSure
Administrator
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
Health and Human Services
Re:
Comment Regarding “Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment
Products”, Docket No. CMS–2023–0106
Dear Ms. Brooks-LaSure:
Governing for Impact (“GFI”) submits this comment on the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(“CFPB”), the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”), and the Treasury Department’s
(“the Treasury”) Notice, “Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products” (“the
RFI”). GFI is an organization dedicated to ensuring that the federal government operates more
effectively for everyday working Americans.
We appreciate the opportunity to comment and we write to address the following Health and
Human Services (HHS)-specific question, found in Section II(c) of the RFI:
“1. What actions should HHS consider taking to address problematic practices related to medical
credit cards or loans, particularly as they relate to patients eligible for or enrolled in Medicare,
Medicaid, or the Children's Health Insurance Program, or patients enrolled in Affordable Care Act
Marketplace plans?”
In this comment, we describe HHS’s authority under the Social Security Act to impose Conditions
of Participation (“CoPs) on facilities that serve Medicare and Medicaid patients and encourage HHS
to use this authority to regulate the use of medical credit cards and loans at covered institutions.
The RFI recognizes some of the patient harms that flow from overuse of medical credit cards and
loans. CFPB’s 2023 report on medical credit cards and financing products highlights many of the
same issues, including the pressure to agree to medical financing some patients may experience when
they do not have sufficient cash, have limited access to other credit, or do not realize there are
assistance programs available.1 This, coupled with patients’ trust in their medical providers who
advertise medical financing products, creates a predatory environment where patients are saddled
with medical debt and the ensuing financial and health repercussions. Given the threat to patients’
health and safety, HHS should consider issuing Conditions of Participation (“CoPs”) banning or
1 CFPB, Medical Credit Cards and Financing Plans (May 2023),
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_medical-credit-cards-and-financing-plans_2023-05.pdf, 10.
1

limiting the use of medical credit cards and loans in facilities that serve Medicare and Medicaid
patients.
I.
HHS has authority under the Social Security Act to issue CoPs for facilities that serve
Medicare and Medicaid patients to regulate the use of medical credit cards and
loans.
HHS has the authority to issue CoPs under Section 1861(e) of the Social Security Act. Section
1861(e) authorizes the Department to update its Medicare CoPs for hospitals as needed, granting
broad authority to the Secretary to adopt “such other requirements” that they “find[] necessary in
the interest of the health and safety of individuals who are furnished services in the institution.”2
Hospitals that receive Medicaid payments must also meet Medicare CoPs.3 Additionally, 42 U.S.C. §
1302(a) authorizes CMS to “publish such rules and regulations ... as may be necessary to the efficient
administration of the [agency's] functions.” And 42 U.S.C. § 1395hh(a)(1) authorizes CMS to
“prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the administration of the insurance
programs” under the Medicare Act.
Issuing CoPs for facilities that participate in the Medicare and Medicaid programs is a long-standing
practice for HHS.4 In fact, the first CoPs were developed and issued in 1966, mere months following
the passage of the statute that authorized the creation of the Medicare and Medicaid programs.5
Since the 1960s, HHS has issued CoPs for participating facilities that define myriad requirements
relating to governing bodies, medical staff, nursing services, and many other aspects of
administration and care.6
Regulations implementing Medicare CoPs for hospitals have been in place for decades and updated
regularly over time. CoPs have been revised in response to, for instance, new technological advances
like telehealth,7 a broader recognition of patient rights,8 the need to modernize definitions of family,9
and new organizational models like multi-hospital systems.10 A new CoP regulating medical credit
cards and loans is similarly responsive to the emerging dangers of predatory medical debt and
10 See, e.g., 79 Fed. Reg. 27106, 27112-17 (May 12, 2014) (updating CoPs regarding governing body consultation and
membership requirements for multi-hospital systems).
9 See 75 Fed. Reg. 70831-44 (Nov. 19, 2010) (requiring hospitals to ensure visitation rights for all patients, including
same-sex spouses and chosen family members).
8 See, e.g., 71 Fed. Reg. 71378-428 (Dec. 8, 2006) (setting forth requirements for patients’ rights in hospitals related to
issues such as restraints, seclusion, and monitoring).
7 See, e.g., 76 Fed. Reg. 25550-65 (May 5, 2011) (adopting a new credentialing and privileging process for physicians and
practitioners providing telemedicine services).
6 See, e.g., id. at Table 5.1; see generally 42 C.F.R. Subchapter G “Standards and Certification.”
5 Lohr KN, editor, Institute of Medicine (US) Committee to Design a Strategy for Quality Review and Assurance in
Medicare, Medicare: A Strategy for Quality Assurance: Volume 1 Ch. 5 (1990),
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK235451/.
4 Biden v. Missouri, 142 S. Ct. 647, 652 (2022) (noting “the longstanding practice of Health and Human Services in
implementing” the statute that authorizes CoPs).
3 42 U.S.C. § 1396d; 42 C.F.R. § 440.10(a)(3)(iii).
2 42 U.S.C. § 1395x(e)(9); see also 42 C.F.R. § 482.1(a)(1)(ii) (“The Secretary may impose additional requirements if they are
found necessary in the interest of the health and safety of the individuals who are furnished services in hospitals.”).
2

providers’ misaligned incentives. As further discussed below, this CoP would address health and
safety concerns consistent with existing CoPs.
CoP regulations are valid even if they tend to benefit patients who are not enrolled in Medicare or
Medicaid more than those who are. There is no statutory limitation that requires a CoP to explicitly
benefit Medicare or Medicaid patients. As stated above, HHS’s authority to set facility-level policy
stems from Section 1861(e)(9), which allows new CoPs that are “in the interest of the health and
safety of individuals who are furnished services in the institution” (emphasis added). This gives the
Department the authority to adopt CoPs that improve the health, safety, and well-being of hospital
patients in general, without requiring a CoP to benefit Medicare patients explicitly. Further, Medicare
CoPs apply on a facility-wide basis and thus extend to all patients, regardless of insurance status or
payment source. Implementing regulations for prior CoPs on visitation rights, for instance,
confirmed that these protections apply to all patients, regardless of payer.11
However, HHS still needs to prove that such a regulation contains an “actual and discernible nexus
between the rule and the conduct or management of Medicare and Medicaid programs[,]” even if
that finding is “based on educated judgments about probabilistic outcomes.”12
II.
Regulating medical credit cards and loans would be “in the interest of the health and
safety” of patients.
A CoP regulating the use of medical credit cards and loans would qualify as a requirement in the
interest of the health and safety of hospital patients “who are furnished services in the institution,”
as required under Section 1861(e).
As the CFPB has recognized, the proliferation of medical cards and installment loans “can increase
the financial burden on patients who may pay more than they otherwise would pay and may
compromise medical outcomes.”13 In some cases, providers may even “upsell” patients on
unnecessary and potentially harmful care.14 In addition, high medical debt contributes to financial
insecurity which, in turn, is linked to worse health outcomes and challenges paying for other
necessities (such as housing and food).15As the RFI notes, patients may feel coerced into accepting
medical financing terms that cause future financial or health problems and may even delay or forgo
15 See, e.g., K. Robin Yabroff et al., “Prevalence And Correlates Of Medical Financial Hardship In The USA,” Journal of
General Internal Medicine (2019) 34: 1494-1502; Liz Hamel et al., The Burden Of Medical Debt, Kaiser Family Foundation
(Jan. 2016), available at:
https://www.kff.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/8806-the-burden-of-medical-debt-results-from-the-kaiser-family-fo
undation-new-york-times-medical-bills-survey.pdf; id.; Elizabeth Sweet et al., “The High Price Of Debt: Household
Financial Debt And Its Impact On Mental Health And Physical Health,” Social Science & Medicine (2013) 9: 94-100.
14 CFPB, What should I know about medical credit cards and payment plans for medical bills? (May 8, 2023), available at:
https://www.consumerfinance.gov/ask-cfpb/what-should-i-know-about-medical-credit-cards-and-payment-plans-for-m
edical-bills-en-1827/.
13 Medical Credit Cards and Financial Plans, supra note 1, at 3.
12 See Merck & Co. v. HHS, 962 F.3d 531, 538-39 (D.C. Cir. 2020).
11 See, e.g., 75 Fed. Reg. at 70835 (“This applies to all patients, regardless of their payment source.”)
3

needed care if they are not made aware of other affordable financing options that may be available to
them.16
Individuals eligible for Medicare and Medicaid likely are specifically affected by the proliferation of
medical credit cards and loans. For instance, as the RFI notes, “health care providers might offer
medical payment products to uninsured patients instead of helping these patients determine their
eligibility for health insurance coverage through Medicaid, Medicare, or subsidized Marketplace
plans.”17
The RFI requested additional information about the extent to which Medicare and Medicaid
recipients are affected by these financial mechanisms and the justification for CoPs regulating their
use could be bolstered by any information HHS receives, such as additional evidence that healthcare
providers or financial institutions specifically market or recommend medical credit cards or loans to
Federal health care program beneficiaries.
III.
Conclusion
We encourage HHS to consider using its authority under the Social Security Act to impose CoPs on
facilities that serve Medicare and Medicaid patients to protect against the harms to patient health
and safety caused by medical credit cards and loans. We applaud the agencies’ efforts in this area and
appreciate the opportunity to comment.
Sincerely,
Anna Rodriguez
Policy Counsel, Governing for Impact
Email: arodriguez [at] governingforimpact.org
17 88 Fed. Reg. 44285.
16 88 Fed. Reg. 44287.
4
