 
September 11, 2023  
 
Chiquita Brooks-LaSure 
Administrator 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
200 Independence Avenue SW 
Washington, DC 20201 
 
Thomas C. West, Jr. 
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy 
Department of the Treasury 
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20220 
 
RE:  
Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products —  
CMS-2023-0106 
AHIP Comments   
 
Submitted electronically via regulations.gov  
 
Dear Administrator Brooks-LaSure, Director Chopra, and Mr. West: 
  
AHIP1 appreciates the opportunity to provide a response to the Consumer Financial Protection 
Bureau (CFPB), Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and the Department of 
Treasury’s (Treasury) Request for Information (RFI) Regarding Medical Payment Products, 
published July 12, 2023 in the Federal Register. The RFI is timely and explores important 
questions about the challenges of medical debt and how medical payment products are impacting 
both individual consumers and the entire health care system.  
  
AHIP member organizations are committed to providing health care solutions and financial 
security to the hundreds of millions of Americans we serve. As health care costs continue to 
increase, American families and consumers have sought additional means of financing the cost 
of care, often at the direction of a health care provider. Given the rise of and often concerning 
uses of medical payment products, we applaud CFPB, HHS and Treasury (“the agencies”) for 
efforts to understand medical payment products and the effects these products have on patients, 
the health care system, and the underlying cost of health care. AHIP recognizes that this RFI 
builds on the rules the agencies have already implemented to assist consumers with managing 
 
1 AHIP is the national association whose members provide health care coverage, services, and solutions to hundreds 
of millions of Americans every day. We are committed to making health care better and coverage more affordable 
and accessible for everyone. 
Rohit Chopra 
Director 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
1700 G Street NW 
Washington, DC 20552 

September 8, 2023 
Page 2 
 
health care costs and medical bills, and to protect patients and consumers from paying inaccurate 
or inflated medical bills.  
  
The agencies pose questions throughout the RFI that address different markets and consumer 
experiences. In detailed comments (attached), we address select questions presented in the RFI. 
We are including only those questions that address issues with which AHIP members have 
expertise. 
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide comments and look forward to continued partnership 
with the agencies to ensure both consumer protection and affordable, quality, equitable health 
care for everyone. If you have any questions, please contact Marcy Buckner at 
mbuckner@ahip.org  
  
Sincerely,   
  
 
 
 
Marcy M. Buckner 
Vice President 
Employer Health Policy & Advocacy 
 
 

September 8, 2023 
Page 3 
 
Specific Responses to RFI Questions 
 
General Questions  
 
Market-level inquiries 
 
9. How do medical payment products and health insurance coverage interact? Do group 
health plan or health insurance issuer practices contribute to uptake of medical payment 
products by patients and providers?  
• Group health plans and health insurance issuers do not interact with medical payment 
products and medical loans. It is important to note that medical payment products are 
neither health insurance nor a health plan. These products exist as a direct financial 
relationship between a health care provider or financial institution and the patient (or 
their guardian or representative.) Medical card payments are made directly to the 
provider and insurers are in no way involved in the payment or repayment process. 
Further, health insurance carriers are not involved with payments between the patient and 
provider in these arrangements and do not assume any of the risk from the medical card 
arrangement.  
• We do not believe that health insurance practices contribute to an uptake of medical 
payment products by patients and providers. On the contrary, health plans are able to 
negotiate prices within their network of providers which drives costs down for 
consumers. Costs are then typically much lower for these consumers than for the 
uninsured, self-pay patients or out of network care. Provider practices may have financial 
incentive to encourage use of payment products in part because encouraging direct 
payment through financing may allow a provider to receive more than they would from a 
health insurer that has negotiated lower rates on behalf of their members. 
 
i. 
How many days do providers typically have to wait to be paid by plans or issuers 
versus by medical payment product companies or general purpose credit card 
companies? What factors, such as administrative requirements or clinical 
reviews, contribute to any differential resolution timelines?  
 
• The timeline for providers to wait to be paid by plans or issuers varies depending on the 
state and that state’s prompt payment laws which require health plans to reimburse a 
provider within a certain amount of days from receiving a clean claim. Payments owed to 
the provider from the patient are independent of claim payments made from issuers to 
providers. AHIP members are not able to respond regarding the amount of time providers 
typically wait before being paid by a medical payment product because health insurance 
issuers are not involved in payments between medical payment products and health care 
providers. 
 

September 8, 2023 
Page 4 
 
ii. 
Does a patient’s use of a medical payment product exempt them from certain 
consumer protections, provider requirements, or group health plan or health 
insurance issuer requirements? Are different types of health coverage treated 
differently? 
 
• Health insurance providers enter into contractual agreements with providers 
independently and with no knowledge of the patient’s use of a medical card. It is not 
practice for a plan or issuer to align payment to providers with the type of health 
coverage the patient has (HMO, PPO, CDHP, level-funded, self-funded, fully insured), 
therefore different types of health coverage are not treated differently when it comes to 
reimbursing the provider.  
 
10. Does health care provider organizational structure, including ownership by private 
equity, affect providers’ decisions to offer and promote these products? 
• There is a concern that a health care provider’s organizational structure, especially if 
owned by private equity, would affect the providers’ decisions to offer and promote 
medical payment products. Many medical payment programs are owned by private 
equity, if those same private equity companies also own the health care provider’s 
organization then there is little to no incentive for the provider to lower or maintain costs. 
  
12. To what extent are patients using medical payment products to pay bills that are 
incorrect, or that could be covered or defrayed by lower-cost alternatives?  
• Health insurance providers do not have access to this data because payments made to 
providers through medical payment products are not being processed through the issuer, 
but instead are payments made from patients directly to the financier or provider. Given 
that bills from health care providers submitted to a health insurance issuer or group health 
plan frequently contain errors, missing or inaccurate information, this possibility would 
seem quite likely. 
 
i. 
What billing errors may patients commonly encounter? 
 
• Health insurance providers are not made aware of whether one of their plan members is 
using a medical payment product, so there would be no way for an issuer to determine 
what billing errors patients using medical payment products may commonly encounter. 
 
ii. 
How does using a medical payment product affect patients’ rights to dispute 
incorrect bills? 
  
• The use of a medical payment product may not affect a patient’s rights to dispute 
incorrect bills because of the protections of the No Surprises Act and its extension for 
those that are insured, uninsured, or self-pay; however, the use of medical payment 
products may reduce the likelihood of a consumer to refute an incorrect bill and how 

September 8, 2023 
Page 5 
 
successful the consumer may be in their dispute. This would also depend on whether the 
consumer must address the incorrect bill with the financier of the medical payment 
program or with the provider and whether the incorrect bill is eligible for independent 
dispute resolution under the No Surprises Act. In addition, since medical payment 
products are not insurance, it is not clear which protections of the No Surprises Act would 
extend to the patient outside of billing from the provider. Once the financier becomes 
involved with collecting payments, the protections needed by the consumer may be more 
in line with financial credit cards and predatory billing than with medical debt. 
 
iii. 
Are certain groups of patients, such as members of specific underserved 
communities, more likely to experience medical billing errors or issues resolving 
disputes over bills paid using medical payment products? 
 
• While AHIP members are not aware of whether one of their plan members is using a 
medical payment product and therefor cannot determine whether certain underserved 
communities are more likely to experience medical billing errors, AHIP members are 
concerned that the marketing of medical payment products to underserved communities 
may mislead consumers into entering in to an agreement with a provider and medical 
payment product financier instead of determining whether other options of coverage are 
available such as Medicare, Medicaid, a subsidized plan on healthcare.gov, or a group 
health plan from an employer. Consumers who may not fully understand their health 
insurance coverage are also more likely to be preyed upon by unscrupulous actors 
resulting in the consumer incurring additional debt which will be reflected negatively on 
their credit report because medical payment programs are considered credit card debt, not 
medical debt. 
 
HHS Specific Questions 
 
1. What actions should HHS consider taking to address problematic practices related to 
medical credit cards or loans, particularly as they relate to patients eligible for or enrolled 
in Medicare, Medicaid, or the Children’s Health Insurance Program, or patients enrolled 
in Affordable Care Act Marketplace plans?  
• AHIP would encourage HHS to require providers to notify the patient that they may be 
eligible for or already enrolled in Medicare, Medicaid, CHIP, an ACA marketplace plan, 
or other group health insurance coverage before marketing medical payment products to 
consumers. Eligibility or enrollment in one of these plans will increase the likelihood that 
the cost of care will be lower than using a medical payment product alone since these 
plans utilize health insurance issuers that are able to negotiate costs with health care 
providers.  
2. What types of health insurance (Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance, etc.) are 
particularly associated with the likelihood that an individual is offered or makes use of 

September 8, 2023 
Page 6 
 
medical credit cards and loans, and how does the type of health coverage affect relevant 
provider billing practices? 
• There is no relationship between health insurance providers and medical credit cards and 
loans so AHIP members are unable to determine the likelihood that an individual is 
offered these financial products based on the type of health coverage the patient is 
enrolled in. 
 
5. How does or might the use of medical credit cards and loans affect the amount and 
timing of cost sharing a patient covered through Medicare, Medicaid, and/or the 
Affordable Care Act Marketplace owes for a covered service?  
• The use of medical credit cards and loans may affect the amount of timing and cost 
sharing a patient owes for a covered service if the claim is not first sent to the insurer 
before the provider issues a billing statement to the patient. If the provider does not first 
submit the claim to the insurer, the patient may receive a bill from the provider that is 
higher than the negotiated cost between the provider and the health insurance issuer. 
Consumers may not understand that the provider has sent them a bill for charges that 
have not been processed by their insurer yet and may pay the full amount. Once the 
provider has been paid, there is no incentive for the provider to file a claim with the 
insurer which could lower costs for the consumer. 
 
6. Hospital Price Transparency: What prices or versions of standard charges (e.g., cash 
prices) are offered to patients who sign up for a medical credit card or installment loan? 
What steps are taken by health care providers to ensure these charges are adequately 
disclosed in accordance with hospital price transparency requirements? Do these charges 
reflect and specifically identify facility fees? 
• AHIP members do not have the data available to determine which prices or versions of 
standard charges are offered to patients who sign up for medical credit cards, but 
anticipate that as more hospitals and health systems come into compliance with the 
Hospital Price Transparency Final Rule, much of that data will be more readily available.  
 
7. How might HHS improve patient understanding of options for covering the cost of 
medical treatments? At what points in the care process could patients be provided with 
information about their financial obligations and payment options? 
• We believe notice to consumers should be abundantly clear and in plain language and 
terms that spell out what the consumer would be consenting to and what costs they would 
incur by entering into a medical payment program as well as notifying the consumer that 
they may be eligible for Medicaid, Medicare, an ACA plan, or group health coverage. 
Patients (or their representative) should be informed of obligations and options at the 
earliest opportunity and steps should be taken to communicate those terms clearly and 
directly, including orally (in person or over the phone) and in writing. 
 
 
