 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 11, 2023 
 
Via Federal eRulemaking Portal 
 
The Honorable Xavier Becerra 
Secretary 
U.S. Department of Health & Human 
Services 
200 Independent Avenue, S.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20201 
 
The Honorable Chiquita Brooks-LaSure 
Administrator 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
P.O. Box 8016 
Baltimore, MD 21244-8016 
 
The Honorable Rohit Chopra 
Director 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
1700 G St., N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20552 
 
The Honorable Janet Yellen 
Secretary  
U.S. Department of the Treasury 
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20220 
 
 
RE: 
“Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products,” 88 Fed. Reg. 44281 
(July 12, 2023), CMS-2023-0106, CFPB-2023-0038, TREAS-DO_2023-0008 
 
Dear Secretary Becerra, Administrator Brooks-LaSure, Director Chopra, and Secretary Yellen: 
 
 
I submit this letter in response to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
(HHS), Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), and Department of Treasury’s 
(collectively, Departments) Request For Information Regarding Medical Payment Products 
(RFI). As the Departments recognize, the skyrocketing cost of healthcare has forced many 
Americans to turn to medical payment products, such as medical credit cards, to obtain 
healthcare services. Originally conceived in the early 2000s as a way for people to finance 
elective medical care like cosmetic surgery, medical credit cards have since exploded in 
availability.1 Now, primary care doctors—and even emergency care providers—accept and offer 
sign-ups for medical credit cards. Lacking adequate oversight, these medical credit cards often 
                                                     
1 Zimmon, Allison J., RX For Costly Credit: Deferred Interest Medical Credit Cards Do More 
Harm Than Good. Boston College Journal of Law & Social Justice, Volume 35:319, 
https://lira.bc.edu/files/pdf?fileid=885c8c8a-82ce-4a97-a426-358c7edbcc6d.  

The Honorable Xavier Becerra 
The Honorable Chiquita Brooks-LaSure  
The Honorable Rohit Chopra 
The Honorable Janet Yellen 
September 11, 2023 
Page 
 
 
2 
contain misleading or consumer unfriendly terms, which disproportionately affect historically 
disadvantaged groups, including African Americans, Latino Americans, and Native Americans, 
and those who are uninsured or underinsured.   
 
This letter specifically addresses the RFI’s questions regarding: health equity concerns; 
consumer confusion; best practices for medical providers who offer medical payment products; 
consumer protections lost using these products; and concerns these products may erode patients’ 
rights, including those under the No Surprises Act. California is uniquely qualified to comment 
on the RFI because it has enacted strong consumer protections to guard against patient harms 
from these products. This comment letter thus provides the Departments with a potential road 
map on how to regulate these products. 
 
I. 
Absent Oversight, Medical Payment Products Exacerbate Health Disparities. 
 
The high cost of medical care is a crushing financial reality for many Americans and 
members of historically disadvantaged groups suffer the most. A 2023 California Health Care 
Foundation survey found that 20% of Californians reported owing debt to a bank, collection 
agency, or other lender, while 19% reported having medical bills on a credit card, and 19% 
reported paying medical bills directly to a provider.2 Seventeen percent of Californians reported 
having bills that are past due or that they cannot pay.3 A staggering 50% of adults in Los Angeles 
County reported taking on credit card debt in order to pay medical bills.4 Disparities in medical 
debt mirror other well-established disparities. More than a third of Californians have medical 
debt, and 52% of Latino Californians and 48% of African American Californians report medical 
debt, as opposed to 28% of white Californians and 27% of Asian Californians.5 Californians with 
lower incomes are far more likely to report having medical debt than those with higher incomes. 
In a June 2023 report, the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health found that adults 
who identified as Latino (12.4%), African American (11%), and American Indian, Alaskan 
Native, Native Hawaiian, Pacific Islander, or multiracial (12.7%) are more likely to report 
having “burdensome” medical debt.6 Burdensome medical debt also impacts households with 
children (12.6%) more than those without children (9.2%),7 and impacts uninsured adults 
(26.3%) more than adults with either public or private health insurance (<10%).8 Thus, medical 
debt and the specter of medical debt burdens many Californians, particularly those who are in 
                                                     
2 Id. 
3 Id. 
4 Id. at 9. 
5 Lucy Rabinowitz Bailey et al., The 2023 CHCF California Health Policy Survey, Cal. Health 
Care Found. 16 (Feb. 16, 2023), https://www.chcf.org/publication/2023-chcf-california-health-policy-
survey/#related-links-and-downloads. 
6 L.A. Cty. Dept. of Pub. Health, Medical Debt in LA County: Baseline Report and Action Plan 
10 (June 2023), http://publichealth.lacounty.gov/chie/reports/Medical_Debt_Report_English.pdf. 
7 Id. at 10. 
8 Id. at 12. 

The Honorable Xavier Becerra 
The Honorable Chiquita Brooks-LaSure  
The Honorable Rohit Chopra 
The Honorable Janet Yellen 
September 11, 2023 
Page 
 
 
3 
minority groups or are economically disadvantaged. Given these struggles, many Californians 
may turn to medical payment products. 
 
A. 
Patients in Dire Need Are Not in a Position to Make Complex 
Financial Decisions 
 
Economically disadvantaged Americans may opt for medical credit cards to cover 
healthcare, when it is presented as the only option. Meanwhile, medical providers offer these 
products to ensure payment. For example, a dentist recently justified CareCredit’s hefty 10-15% 
service fees, saying some patients cannot afford treatment without financing and may have poor 
credit, otherwise the provider may not be paid.9 Medical credit cards bridge this gap at the 
expense of both patients and providers—patients pay high interest rates and providers pay large 
fees. Thus while such products may appear to be a lifeline to pay for care in the short-term, users 
risk being saddled with high interest rates or getting trapped into years of debt. 
 
While some patients may voluntarily choose to finance elective procedures through 
medical credit cards, others, such as low-income patients, must choose between life-saving care 
and potential financial ruin. And they are often confronted with this choice when vulnerable, 
such as while awaiting a medical procedure–drowsy, in pain, or generally stressed.10 
Additionally, patients might feel pressured to sign up for a medical credit card because it is the 
only option offered. Misleading terms and conditions add to this stress.  
 
The most onerous of these products—and the most prevalent—are deferred interest credit 
cards.11 Unlike traditional loans where interest is assessed on the current balance, deferred 
interest credit cards assess interest, but delay the payment of the interest until the end of the set 
deferral period—usually six to twelve months. If the patient successfully pays off the balance 
within the deferral period, then no interest is owed. However, if any balance remains at the end 
of the deferral period, the patient will owe the remaining balance plus the entirety of the accrued 
interest based on the initial transaction.12 Confusing or mistaking deferred interest as “no 
interest” or “0% APR,” many patients do not anticipate the retroactive interest, especially if a 
medical provider misled them into believing the promotional period was a “no interest” 
                                                     
9 https://www.reddit.com/r/Dentistry/comments/158fc5x/carecredit_provider_fees_what_do 
you_guys_do/.  
10 Brenden Rearick, Health Care Providers Are Pushing Medical Credit Cards — Here’s Why 
You Should Avoid Them (July 25, 2023), https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/health-care-providers-are-
pushing-medical-credit-cards-heres-why-you-should-avoid-them.  
11 See Chi Wu, Deceptive Bargain; the Hidden Time Bomb of Deferred Interest Credit Cards, 
Nat’l Consumer Law Ctr. 5 (December 2015), https://www.nclc.org/images/pdf/pr-reports/report-
deferred-interest.pdf. 
12 LaToya Irby, Everything You Need to Know About Medical Credit Cards, (March 30, 2022). 
https://www.thebalancemoney.com/basic-facts-about-medical-credit-cards-4144806. 

The Honorable Xavier Becerra 
The Honorable Chiquita Brooks-LaSure  
The Honorable Rohit Chopra 
The Honorable Janet Yellen 
September 11, 2023 
Page 
 
 
4 
promotion.13 For example, one patient complained of receiving an “$860 interest charge on a 
$900 balance” without any warning.14 As a 2015 CFPB report noted, almost one-third of 
consumers who paid deferred interest, paid off their full balance within two billing cycles of the 
end of deferral, calling “into serious question the notion that consumers understand the ways in 
which the product works.”15 Those without the resources to pay off their balance quickly may 
face a sudden, unanticipated, and unaffordable increase in their balance. Low-income 
communities are particularly vulnerable, as people with credit scores below 619 incur deferred 
interest at a much higher rate than the general public.16  
 
On top of the stress of financing expensive medical care and deciphering the terms and 
conditions of medical payment products, language barriers also exacerbate medical debt 
inequalities. In a 2023 report by the CFPB, many consumers with limited English proficiency did 
not understand that their medical provider enrolled them for a medical payment product because 
the medical provider failed to provide requisite language access services.17 More generally, a 
2021 nationwide study found that limited English proficiency is an independent driver of health 
disparities and exacerbates other social determinants of health.18 Limited English proficiency is 
also associated with lower quality care and worse health outcomes.19 Providing terms and 
conditions in the patient’s language of choice is the bedrock for patients’ informed evaluation of 
medical payment products. The Departments must eliminate or reduce language barriers to 
address health equity issues regarding medical payment products.  
 
B. 
California’s Protections Against Medical Payment Products Are a 
Model Framework for the Departments 
 
Unfortunately, since many people do not know they have the right to complain or seek 
relief, the full extent of the harm caused by medical payment products is unknown.20 Moreover, 
the deep shame that medical debt inflicts on people causes them to stay quiet, even if they know 
                                                     
13 Id. at 1.  
14 CareCredit Reviews – 762 Reviews, Sitejabber (accessed Aug. 15, 2023), 
https://www.sitejabber.com/reviews/carecredit.com.  
15 Consumer Fin. Prot. Bureau, The Consumer Credit Card Market Report 200 (Dec. 3, 2015), 
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/201512_cfpb_report-the-consumer-credit-card-market.pdf.  
16 34% and 20%, respectively. Consumer Fin. Prot. Bureau, supra note 14, at 13.  
17 Consumer Fin. Prot. Bureau, Medical Credit Cards and Financing Plans 12 (citing Consumer 
Fin. Prot. Bureau, Complaint 3325167 (July 31, 2019). (May 2023), 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_medical-credit-cards-and-
financing-plans_2023-05.pdf. 
18 Jason Espinoza & Sabrina Derrington, How Should Clinicians Respond to Language Barriers 
That Exacerbate Health Inequity?, 23 AMA J. Ethics 109, 109 (2021), https://journalofethics.ama-
assn.org/article/how-should-clinicians-respond-language-barriers-exacerbate-health-inequity/2021-02. 
19 Id. 
20 Id. 

The Honorable Xavier Becerra 
The Honorable Chiquita Brooks-LaSure  
The Honorable Rohit Chopra 
The Honorable Janet Yellen 
September 11, 2023 
Page 
 
 
5 
they have rights for redress.21 Due to these challenges, California has enacted laws to help ensure 
that patients understand the terms of these products, which may assist future federal rulemaking. 
 
To “protect consumers from predatory [financial] products that may be facilitated by 
[licensed medical providers]” and “reduce the situations in which a patient is asked to agree to 
services and pay for those services by signing up for a new financial product that the patient may 
not fully understand,” California revised Business and Professions Code section 654.3 in 2019.22, 
Among its many protections, medical providers are prohibited from:  
 
 Enrolling patients for a medical credit card or loan that contains a deferred interest 
provision.23  
 Completing any portion of an application for a third-party credit card or enrolling 
the patient for those products if the application was not entirely completed by the 
patient.24  
 Enrolling patients for a third-party credit card or loan if the patient is sedated or 
unconscious.25  
 Enrolling patients for a third-party credit card in any treatment area unless the 
patient agrees to fill out the application in the treatment area.26  
 Charging treatment to a third-party medical credit card or loan without first 
providing the patient with a treatment plan containing a list of services to be 
charged, as well as a number of enumerated disclosures regarding insurance share 
of cost and the right to seek treatment that is covered by the patient’s insurance 
plan.27 
 Enrolling patients for a third-party medical credit card or loan without obtaining the 
patient’s signature confirming they received a list of enumerated disclosures 
informing the patient of the nature of the credit product and their rights.28 If the 
provider communicated primarily with the patient in one of California’s Medi-Cal 
                                                     
21 Karen Pollitz & Cynthia Cox, Medical Debt Among People With Health Insurance, Kaiser 
Family Found. (Jan. 07, 2014), https://www.kff.org/private-insurance/report/medical-debt-among-people-
with-health-insurance; Manuel Tobias, Dental Patients Face Years of Debt, Inflated Bills, Cal Matters 
(last updated Feb. 27, 2020), https://calmatters.org/projects/dental-patients-face-years-of-debt-inflated-
bills. 
22 Cal. S. Comm. Report S.B. 639, 2019-2020 Regular Sess., at 1 (Aug. 19, 2019); Cal. S. Comm. 
Report S.B. 639, 2019-2020 Regular Sess., at 2 (Sept. 06, 2019).  
23 Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code, § 654.3(b)(1).  
24 Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code, § 654.3(e). 
25 Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code, § 654.3(j)(1).  
26 Id.  
27 Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code, § 654.3(h). 
28 Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code, § 654.3(f). 

The Honorable Xavier Becerra 
The Honorable Chiquita Brooks-LaSure  
The Honorable Rohit Chopra 
The Honorable Janet Yellen 
September 11, 2023 
Page 
 
 
6 
Threshold Languages, such as Spanish or Korean, the provider must translate these 
disclosures into that language.29, 30  
 Charging treatment to a third-party medical credit card or loan more than 30 days 
before the treatment is rendered.31  
 Retaining any amount of payment charged to a third-party medical credit card or 
loan for treatment or services that were not rendered.32 The provider must refund 
the patient’s account within 15 days of the patient’s request.33  
 
Section 654.3 was a first step towards protecting California consumers from the risks of 
medical payment products, and its provisions can serve as a template for future federal 
rulemaking. CFPB and HHS should further protect consumers and patients nationwide by 
implementing greater restrictions on how providers steer patients to these products. Future 
regulation should ban medical providers from assisting or aiding patients in the enrollment of 
these products in any way, prohibiting the enrollment of these products in medical offices and 
facilities even when initiated or completed by patients, and increase the cooling-off period 
between application and use of medical payment products. 
 
II. 
Medical Credit Cards Should Be Restricted to Payment of Medical Care and 
the Debt Should Be Classified as Medical Debt  
 
Medical debt, which is debt owed to a provider by a patient, and is held by the provider, 
offers patients significant protections from collections. California’s Health Care Debt and Fair 
Billing Act shields Californians with medical debt by restricting hospitals from selling patient 
debt unless specified conditions are met and prohibiting credit reporting or initiating civil actions 
for 180 days after initial billing.34 On an industry-wide level, the three major credit reporting 
agencies have also agreed to not include medical debt on credit reports.35 However, once a 
patient uses a medical credit card to finance her medical care, it is no longer classified as medical 
debt, and the patient loses any protections against credit reporting or billing. Despite being called 
“medical credit cards,” the debt accrued is classified as consumer debt. By using medical credit 
                                                     
29 The Medi-Cal Threshold Languages are established by California law and serve as language 
access requirements for managed healthcare plans under the Medi-Cal program. See Cal. Welf. & Inst. 
Code, § 14029.91; 42 C.F.R. § 438.10(d)(1)-(3). These languages are periodically published online. See 
e.g. Cal. Health & Hum. Serv., Quarterly Threshold Languages by Month of Eligibility and County (last 
visited Aug. 3. 2023), https://data.chhs.ca.gov/dataset/quarterly-certified-eligible-counts-by-month-of-
eligibility-county-and-threshold-language/resource/ff63939e-6675-474c-ad01-56f1f240e68d.  
30 Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code, § 654.3(i).  
31 Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code, § 654.3(c)(1).  
32 Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 654.3(f). 
33 Id.  
34 Cal. Health & Safety Code § 127425; Cal. Civ. Code §§ 1788.14(e), 1788.185. 
35 Medical Debt Collection – Know Your Rights, Department of Financial Protection & 
Innovation https://dfpi.ca.gov/2023/02/13/medical-debt-collection-know-your-rights/.  

The Honorable Xavier Becerra 
The Honorable Chiquita Brooks-LaSure  
The Honorable Rohit Chopra 
The Honorable Janet Yellen 
September 11, 2023 
Page 
 
 
7 
cards, patients lose vital debt collection protections. Additionally, the debt is reported 
immediately to credit agencies.36  
 
As discussed above, low-income patients are more prone to use medical credit cards, and 
providers are hesitant to finance such patients. To protect such patients, the Departments should 
designate debt held in medical payment products as medical debt. To accomplish this, the 
Departments must restrict the use of medical credit cards to medical payments. This is crucial, as 
medical credit cards are expanding the scope of their services. Consumers can now purchase 
ordinary goods such as groceries, health and beauty items at select retailers.37  
 
III. 
The Departments Should Propose Legislative Change to Protect Patients 
from Medical Payment Products  
 
As Americans’ collective medical debt soared to $195 billion in 2019, the Departments 
should step in by using their existing powers and proposing legislative change.38 The 
Departments should focus their attention on provider compliance in offering financial assistance 
and reduction of deductibles in health plans. 
 
A. 
Medical Providers Should Be Required to Screen for Charity Care 
Before Offering Medical Payment Products 
 
Medical providers often fail to screen patients adequately for financial assistance.39 One 
study suggests that nearly half of nonprofit hospital organizations routinely send medical bills to 
patients who qualify for charity care.40 Numerous studies also suggest that, despite being 
required by federal law to make charity care available to patients, nonprofit hospitals spend less 
on charity care as a percentage of their overall expenses than their for-profit or public 
                                                     
36 John Miller, When does the CareCredit Credit Card report to the credit bureaus? 
https://wallethub.com/answers/cc/when-does-carecredit-credit-card-report-to-credit-bureaus-
2140808198/.  
37 CareCredit credit card network expands to include 8,500+ Walgreens® and Duane Reade® 
stores in the U.S., Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands https://www.carecredit.com/pressrelease/carecredit-
expands-into-walgreens-duane-reade/ (September 23, 2019); Does Walgreens Take CareCredit? 
https://differencewalla.com/walgreens-carecredit. 
38 1 in 10 Adults Owe Medical Debt, With Millions Owing More Than $10,000 (March 10, 2022). 
https://www.kff.org/health-costs/press-release/1-in-10-adults-owe-medical-debt-with-millions-owing-
more-than-10000/#:~:text=The%202020%20survey%20suggests%20Americans,variation 
%20from%20year%20to%20year.  
39 E.g., Cons. Fin. Prot. Bureau, Dept. of Health & Human Svcs., Dept. of the Treasury, Request 
for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products 30 (2023) (requesting information on potential 
actions the CFPB could undertake). 
40 Jordan Rau, Patients Eligible for Charity Care Instead Get Big Bills, KFF Health News (Oct. 
14, 2019), https://kffhealthnews.org/news/patients-eligible-for-charity-care-instead-get-big-bills. 

The Honorable Xavier Becerra 
The Honorable Chiquita Brooks-LaSure  
The Honorable Rohit Chopra 
The Honorable Janet Yellen 
September 11, 2023 
Page 
 
 
8 
counterparts.41 These hospitals also regularly take aggressive collection actions against 
patients.42 
 
For medical providers, the ease and convenience of medical payment products offer a 
tempting alternative to assessing financial assistance such as charity care, or putting the patient 
on a payment plan. Less scrupulous providers may even sign up patients without their consent or 
knowledge, fail to adequately explain the products’ terms, or actively misrepresent the terms. 
 
As a template for federal legislation and regulation, existing California state law requires 
that all hospitals, whether public or private: 
 
 Provide patients with a written notice that informs them about the availability of the 
hospital’s discount payment and charity care policies, including information about 
eligibility, and contact information for someone who can explain these policies.43  
 Conspicuously post in publicly visible locations its policy for financially qualified and 
self-pay patients.44  
 Make all reasonable efforts to obtain from the patient or the patient’s representative 
information about whether health insurance or sponsorship may cover the charges for 
care.45 
 
Like California, federal regulations should protect patients who may qualify for financial 
assistance from medical payment products. Options available to the Departments include:  
 
 The Treasury Department should interpret Internal Revenue Code § 501(r)(6) and 26 
Code of Federal Regulations § 1.501(r)-6 to include signing patients up for medical 
payment products without screening patients for financial assistance eligibility first as 
an “extraordinary collection action” – thus compelling tax-exempt hospitals to do so.  
 To achieve even broader coverage of mandatory screening, HHS should exercise its 
authority as the administrator of Medicare, Medicaid, the Children’s Health Insurance 
Program, and similar federal programs, to require that all hospitals accepting payment 
from such programs screen every patient for eligibility for financial assistance.  
                                                     
41 See Michael Karpman, Most Adults with Past-Due Medical Debt Owe Money to Hospitals, 
Urban Inst. (Mar. 13, 2023), https://www.urban.org/research/publication/most-adults-past-due-medical-
debt-owe-money-hospitals; Ge Bai et al., Analysis Suggests Government and Nonprofit Hospitals’ 
Charity Care Is Not Aligned With Their Favorable Tax Treatment, 40 Health Affairs 629, 629 (2021), 
https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/full/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.01627. 
42 Karpman, supra note 41. 
43 Cal. Health & Safety Code § 127410(a). 
44 Cal. Health & Safety Code § 127410(c). 
45 Cal. Health & Safety Code § 127420(a). 

The Honorable Xavier Becerra 
The Honorable Chiquita Brooks-LaSure  
The Honorable Rohit Chopra 
The Honorable Janet Yellen 
September 11, 2023 
Page 
 
 
9 
 CFPB should use its authority to prevent unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts and 
practices under the Consumer Financial Protection Act, 12 U.S.C. § 5531, to require 
that healthcare providers screen patients for eligibility for financial assistance before 
enrolling them in any medical payment product. 
 CFPB should require that providers of medical payment products undertake reasonable 
efforts to ensure that consumers are not charged for services that should be covered by 
insurance or provider financial assistance. “Reasonable efforts” could be defined to 
include receiving a certification from the provider that the patient in question was 
screened for and found ineligible for financial assistance. 
 CFPB should utilize the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act to hold providers of 
medical credit cards accountable.46 The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act requires 
credit card issuers to “consider the ability of the consumer to make the required 
payments” before “open[ing] any credit card account for any consumer under an open 
end consumer credit plan.” Consideration of the consumer’s ability to make required 
payments should be defined to include their eligibility for financial assistance. 
 The Departments should implement punitive provisions against non-compliant 
providers and medical payment product companies. In addition to civil penalties, such 
provisions against providers might include chargebacks, whereas consequences for 
non-compliant medical payment product companies might include invalidating a 
patient’s debt if the patient was improperly screened prior to being enrolled in the 
medical payment product. 
 
These proposed measures could help ensure that patients are not required to assume debt 
for medical care that may be covered by insurance or that may fall within the provider’s financial 
assistance policy.  
 
B. 
The Departments Should Reduce Cost Sharing or Implement 
Monthly Cost Sharing Limits to Reduce Reliance on Medical Payment 
Products 
 
By enacting regulations limiting patient financial responsibility, the Departments can 
reduce patient expenditures on healthcare and thereby reduce reliance upon medical payment 
products. Reducing cost sharing limits may be a practical route. In 2022, Texas A&M University 
researchers published a study of medical care utilization of employees enrolled in high 
deductible health plans.47 According to this study, employees who earned less than $75,000 per 
year were less likely to use primary care and preventative care services than their higher earning 
                                                     
46 15 U.S.C. § 1665(e). 
47 Benjamin Ukert, PhD and Stephen Esquivel-Picket, PhD, Disparities in Health Care Use 
Among Low-Salary and High-Salary Employees AJMC, Volume 28, Issue 5, (May 9, 2022) 
https://www.ajmc.com/view/disparities-in-health-care-use-among-low-salary-and-high-salary-employees.  

The Honorable Xavier Becerra 
The Honorable Chiquita Brooks-LaSure  
The Honorable Rohit Chopra 
The Honorable Janet Yellen 
September 11, 2023 
Page 
 
 
10 
counter parts, resulting in more utilization of acute and inpatient health services.48 Restated, 
patients avoid care because they are underinsured, meaning “their health care costs and 
deductibles were especially high compared to their incomes.”49 The increased use of high 
deductible health plans is driving the increasing numbers of underinsured Americans.50 
Deductibles increased from an average of $533 in 2009 to $1,655 in 2019, and high-deductible 
health plan enrollment increased from 25.3% in 2010 to 47% in 2018.51 The median American 
income in 2021 was $70,784.52 The Internal Revenue Service’s 2024 limit for high deductible 
health plans is $8,050 for individuals and $16,100 for a family.53 Thus, for half of all American 
households, the maximum out of pocket limit for high deductible health plans exceeds 22% of 
annual household income—a financially suffocating amount for healthcare. 
 
Given the high burden of maximum out of pocket expenses, the Departments should 
endeavor to lower annual deductibles, which would reduce the financial burden of healthcare, 
and in turn reduce use of medical payment products. The Departments should evaluate moving 
insurance policies from annual deductibles to monthly cost-sharing limits.54 Under a monthly 
annual cost limit, deductibles could be pro-rated on a monthly basis to 1/12th of the current 
annual deductible. This may help patients, including those suffering from acute illnesses, to 
access necessary care “without staring down a deductible that is more than their monthly take-
home pay.”55 By moving to a monthly maximum, the reduced financial burden of healthcare 
could also reduce reliance on medical payment products. 
 
IV. 
Medical Credit Cards May Be Used to Circumvent the No Surprises Act 
 
 
Medical credit cards may circumvent the protections of the No Surprises Act. In addition 
to the federal protections against surprise billing, since 2016, Californians have been protected 
by Assembly Bill 72 (AB 72). AB 72’s protections mirror the No Surprises Act, and increased 
network participation among providers and reduced the cost of care to Californians. Both the No 
Surprises Act and AB 72 have yielded positive protections and results for patients, but medical 
credit cards could be used circumvent these protections.  
                                                     
48 Id. 
49 David Blumenthal and Sara Collins, Millions of Americans have health insurance that isn’t 
‘good enough’, STAT News (November 4, 2022), https://www.statnews.com/2022/11/04/millions-
americans-health-insurance-isnt-good-enough/.  
50 Paul Shafer, supra. Rethinking Annual Deductibles: The Case for Monthly Cost-Sharing Limits, 
Health Affairs (October 16, 2020). 
51 Id. 
52 https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2022/demo/p60-276.html  
53 https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/rp-23-23.pdf.  
54 Paul Shafer, Michal Horný & Stacie B. Dusetzina, Rethinking Annual Deductibles: The Case 
for Monthly Cost-Sharing Limits, Health Affairs (October 16, 2020), https://www.healthaffairs.org/ 
content/forefront/rethinking-annual-deductibles-case-monthly-cost-sharing-limits. 
55 Id. 

The Honorable Xavier Becerra 
The Honorable Chiquita Brooks-LaSure  
The Honorable Rohit Chopra 
The Honorable Janet Yellen 
September 11, 2023 
Page 
 
 
11 
 
First, medical credit card companies advertise that medical credit cards can be used to 
pay surprise bills. A CareCredit commercial first published on April 28, 2022 specifically 
suggests that CareCredit cards can be used to pay “unexpectedly high” or “surprise” bills.56 
Second, in anticipation of potential insurance disputes, some medical providers have started to 
collect expected co-insurance from patients prior to submitting claims to patient’s insurance 
company.57 This practice may infringe upon the protections of the No Surprises Act if the bills 
exceed the patient’s actual co-insurance responsibility. A medical provider who engages in this 
practice, and offers medical credit card sign ups, may have patients sign up for these credit cards 
to pay the expected co-insurance. This allows the provider to receive payment immediately at a 
higher rate than allowed by the No Surprises Act. Meanwhile, patients are subject to surprise 
billing and lose medical debt protections. Third, the No Surprises Act does not encompass 
unexpected medical bills caused by rising medical prices, higher deductibles, and 
underinsurance, which may ultimately force patients to turn to medical credit cards.58 Thus, by 
scrutinizing medical credit cards, the Departments may strengthen the No Surprises Act’s 
protections.  
 
V. 
Conclusion 
 
I strongly support the Departments’ effort to address medical payment products and 
explore options to expand patient protections, including protections similar to or greater than 
those offered to patients in California. I appreciate your consideration of these comments and 
look forward to a continued partnership. Please do not hesitate to contact my office if you have 
any follow up questions or concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ROB BONTA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
California Attorney General 
                                                     
56 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hgqIX7HOJik.  
57 More hospitals want patients to pay in advance. Is that radical transparency—or unfair to 
patients? (Updated March 20, 2023) https://www.advisory.com/daily-briefing/2021/10/13/advance-
payment.  
58 Aaron Carroll, What’s Wrong With Health Insurance? Deductibles Are Ridiculous, for Starters 
(July 7, 2022), https://www.nytimes.com/2022/07/07/opinion/medical-debt-health-care-cost.html. 
