September 6, 2023 
Allan Share 
President 
Spa Industry Association 
SUBJECT: Docket No. CFPB-2023-0038 
 
Dear Dr. Chopra, 
To the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Department of Health and Human Services, and 
Department of the Treasury: 
We are writing on behalf of the Spa Industry Association which represents a membership of more than 
86,000 practitioners including estheticians, cosmetologists, medical and chiropractic doctors, 
naturopaths, and fitness experts who work in varied locations such as day spas, salons, resorts, and 
medical practices both domestically and internationally. Our focus is on providing resources that enable 
our members to connect with each other and their clients so everyone can pursue and achieve their 
own health and wellness.  
A critical component of our mission is ensuring that consumers have a way to access wellness care even 
when it’s not covered by insurance. Accordingly, we are writing on behalf of our members to respond to 
your “Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products” dated July 7, 2023 (the “RFI”). We 
are concerned that some of the concerns raised in the RFI, including those related to the availability of 
credit through “medical payment products” will reduce access to the care our members provide. Our 
members’ experience indicates that our clients appreciate and often need the ability to use credit when 
paying for their services.  
While many of the services our members provide are not covered by health insurance, they are still 
critical to an individual’s wellness. For example, our members may assist their clients by developing 
strategies to strengthen their immune system, enhance their skin care, eating the right food and taking 
the correct nutritional supplements, or exercise properly. These types of treatments are not always 
covered by health insurance and a client will often have to pay for such treatments directly out of 
pocket.  
Many people could not afford the needed wellness care our members provide if they had to pay by cash 
or check out-of-pocket. To assist their clients, our members offer financing options like CareCredit. 
There is no question that products like CareCredit make our members’ wellness care more accessible to 
people who need that care.  As stated earlier, just because a treatment or procedure is not covered by 
insurance does not mean it’s unimportant.   
Sometimes, our clients utilize a finance option so they can access the wellness care they need while 
staying within their monthly budgets. Promotional financing options such as deferred interest help by 
spreading the cost of care out over a longer period of time. This means that clients are able to access 
potentially “uncovered” treatments without compromising their health because of insurance plan 

limitations.  Healthcare financing options have been and continue to be an important tool for our 
members and their clients in making wellness accessible. 
I hope the agencies find these comments helpful and responsive to the RFI.  We look forward to working 
to continue to expand client access to quality health care. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Allan Share 
 
 
 
