 
 
9/5/2023 
 
Director Chopra: 
 
I am pleased to respond on behalf of the American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA) to the Request for 
Information Regarding Medical Payment Products (RFI) issued by the Consumer Financial Protection 
Bureau, Department of Health and Human Services, and the Treasury Department.  AAHA is the only 
exclusive companion-animal veterinary association, serving nearly 50,000 individual veterinary providers, 
including veterinarians, technicians, managers, client service specialists, and others.  AAHA is the leader in 
developing benchmarks of excellence, business practice standards, informative publications, and 
educational programs designed to help companion-animal practices thrive. 
 
Although veterinary care is not within scope of the RFI, the agencies’ discussion pertains to popular 
payment methods that are used extensively in veterinary care.  AAHA believes it is important for the 
agencies to understand the perspective of veterinarians and their customers in the event there is an 
attempt to regulate the use of credit for care. 
 
Elective procedures are not common in veterinary medicine.  Pet owner clients come to their veterinary 
care provider for necessary things, such as wellness care or urgent care and they generally pay out of 
pocket for this care, as pet insurance is not yet widely adopted and veterinarians are not in a position to 
administer payment plans.  Unless the client has the ability to pay the invoice up front, the options for 
payment include credit cards (including CareCredit), borrowing from friends/family, or foregoing care for 
the household pet. 
 
For those clients who do not have access to credit, veterinarians frequently administer “economic 
euthanasia.”  This practice is as tragic as it sounds.  When a family does not have the means to pay for 
critical care for a beloved pet, euthanasia is frequently the only humane alternative.  This creates significant 
stress on the family, as well as on the veterinary practice. 
 
Economic euthanasia is traumatic not only for pet owners who feel tremendous guilt, but also for the 
veterinary teams—some of whom then get blamed for not providing free or heavily discounted care.  
Burnout, attrition, and depression are common and the economics of pet care are a factor. 
 
Public policy should expand, not restrict, access to credit for veterinary care.  Products like CareCredit are a 
critical tool for veterinary offices to offer their clients when talking about pet care.  In my over twenty years 
in veterinary medicine, I can say with confidence that CareCredit plays a major role in providing access to 
care that would otherwise be unattainable.  Our members get positive feedback about CareCredit.  
Personally, I cannot tell you how many times, especially in emergency practice, a pet owner would tell me 

 
 
they had CareCredit and I would breathe a sigh of relief knowing the pet would be able to get the care it 
needed. 
 
The RFI also suggests that deferred interest promotional financing is somehow harmful to consumers.  That 
is not the experience our members have.  Our members are not successful when they offer financing 
options that consumers find unattractive or even deceptive.  Conversely, customers are loyal to practices 
that give them a variety of payment options that work with their budgets.  This is why products like 
CareCredit are popular with our members.  While credit is an important facilitator of care, deferred interest 
financing can make it more affordable than other types of credit.  Not only does a pet owner get access to 
pet care with deferred interest financing, but they also can avoid all interest costs if they pay their balance 
within the promotional period.  This is something that most credit cards do not offer, but can make the cost 
of animal care easier to afford.  AAHA strongly urges the agencies to preserve access to deferred interest 
financing. 
 
I recognize the RFI is focused on the care provided by hospitals and how clients may pay for such care.  
However, the agencies should understand that products like CareCredit are beneficial because pet owners 
can use them for a variety of purposes not related to human medical care.  Restrictions on CareCredit and 
similar products could have significant unintended consequences, especially if the utility or value 
associated with the card is diminished. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide AAHA’s perspective.   
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Dr. Jessica Vogelsang,  
Chief Medical Officer 
American Animal Hospital Association  
 
 
 
 
