Date:  7/10/2023 
 
To:  
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
(CMS), Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Department of the Treasury 
(Treasury) 
Cc:  
Federal Reserve, X9 ISO20022 Working Group on Faster Healthcare Payments  
From:  Kendra Wyatt, New Birth Company LLC, Chief Executive Officer 
Re:  
Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products 
 
I am answering this RFI as a State Licensed Healthcare Provider, who is in-network with Kansas 
and Missouri Medicaid, Tricare, Federal Exchange Insurance Products and 3rd Party Commercial 
Insurance Plans.  I am reviewing the use of medical payment credit cards for my business right 
now due to high deductible maternity benefits and slow insurance plan payments.   
 
The bluntness in my RFI response reflects the intolerable length of time it takes for small 
healthcare businesses to be paid by Insurance Plans and TPAs reviewing claims. 60+ days is 
common for Federal Exchange and TPA plans. In some cases, we are faxing and mailing claims. 
These systems can’t support the 10s of ICD10 codes needed to back up modern Social 
Determinant of Health (SODH) risk assessments.   
 
We can’t talk about faster payments in healthcare without talking about the impact of 
ISO20022 on the American banking system and that impact on the small business owner. Large 
banks and vendors are working on ISO20022 adoption and the ability to bill their customers 
(me) in real time.  Large institutions will leverage fast-payment bank products into basis point 
discounts and small business providers will be stuck with no banking float.  
 
Mr. Mick Talley and I co-chair an X9 ISO20022 Faster Healthcare Payments Working Group. I 
recommend you interview me, Mr. Talley, Mr. Stephen Ranzini with University Bank and Mr. 
David Repking at JPMorganChase, Chair of X9C and ISO 20022 Market Practice Industry Forum. 
Guy Berg and Carolyn Kroll with the Chicago Federal Reserve are key leaders in the faster 
payments space.  I recommend talking to Professor Ge Bai, John Hopkins regarding Hospitals 
non-for-profit tax status.  
 
In the spirit of “if you oppose, propose” I ask the Biden Administration, CFPB, CMS, HHS, the 
ONC, Treasury and the Federal Reserve to sponsor 4 Corner Pilots of “Faster Payments” in the 
healthcare sector.  We already have a (4 Corner) healthcare use case using the Federal Reserve 
framework. Let’s learn by doing. We are underutilizing our national HIT infrastructure; and 
driving out small business providers in our underserved, rural and tribal communities. Doing 
nothing represents the status quo of friction in 18.3% of the GDP. The use of medical credit 
cards is a symptom; the disease is friction and lack of innovation.  We must create the low-
friction policy environment where healthcare providers can survive and thrive.  Let’s support 
alternate market forces to compete head-to-head with robber barons who make money off the 
friction.  Thank you for listening.  I welcome your inquiries regarding my responses.  
 

 
What are the benefits, costs, and risks of medical payment products for consumers, health 
care providers, and companies offering these products?  
Our APRN Midwife Led & State Licensed Birth Center provides low-risk pregnant women with 
prenatal, birth, and birth facility services for mothers and their newborns.  We represent the 
best-case scenario of a low-risk birth and appropriate resourced birth experience.  
 
There is a myth in US healthcare that “Pregnancy & Birth” is covered 100% by all American 
insurance plans.  This is simply NOT THE CASE.  High deductibles are being applied to low-risk 
birth.   
 
Plan deductibles of $2000, $3000, $4000, and $5000 are commonly applied deductibles for 
maternity services.  HHS needs to compare the differences in payments made through 
Medicaid, Federal Employee Health Plan and the Federal Exchange Plans.  The Federal Exchange 
Plans have the least programming and the highest deductibles for Maternity Services. The cost 
of the newborn is paid separately from the mother, adding additional cost.  I have no desire to 
take these young families to small claims court, yet my unpaid patient accounts receivables is 
currently over $100,000.   
 
What are the terms of medical payment products, including interest rates and fees?  
My understanding it varies based on the terms of the loan. I’ve attached marketing material 
from one company.  
 
How much debt do consumers carry on medical credit cards and loans in total, and what is 
the average individual debt level?  If we move forward with this product, the patient debt will 
be from $1000-$5000 dollars reflecting their plan deductible.   
 
How concentrated is the medical payment product market, and what role do private equity 
firms play in this market?  I do not know.  I only have exposure to Care Credit and United 
Credit.   
 
Are there specific populations (e.g., race, socioeconomic status, gender identity, sexual 
orientation, age, language, etc.) or geographic regions that experience disproportionately 
higher utilization of medical payment products?  Look at Maternity Care. Look at States where 
there is no Medicaid expansion and where the Medicaid income levels for Maternity coverage 
are low.    
 
What are the health equity impacts of medical payment products and related billing and 
collection policies and practices? Many OB, Pediatric, Dentist and Orthodontic Offices do not 
participate in Medicaid.  So, by definition, access to medical credit is only way for these patients 
to access highly desirable services where the Provider refuses to accept less than 
Medicare/Cost based reimbursement.   
 

It is an American policy failure that we haven’t adopted aligned multi-payer policy and payment 
environment for high utilization and highly desirable outcomes.   
Align Birth across Medicaid, Federal Exchange, Tricare, VA CCN, Federal Employee Health Plan.  
PROTIP:  **Providers will change behavior if you pay them quickly. ** 
 
Kansas Medicaid pays the Pregnancy and Birth Global of 59400 70% of Medicare.  Certified 
Nurse Midwives are only paid 75% of the OB Global, which is only 50% of Medicare.  The Birth 
Center reimbursement of $1295 hasn’t been increased for 20 years.  
 
Do medical payment products affect members of specific underserved communities 
differently, including members of Tribal communities and geographically isolated 
communities?  I’m thinking many of these places of no access to capital.  Ask Matt Libman, CEO 
of United Credit and Beto Casellas, CEO of Care Credit where they offer their product.  
 
Do certain products or policies present opportunities to better serve members of 
underserved communities? Yes. Suggestion….US Government sponsors pregnant families with 
personal health bank accounts with first $10,000 to purchase maternity/birth care as they see 
fit, subject to IRS eligibility criteria, allowing families to bank unused amount in child’s name.  
Implement this for all Americans including Medicaid eligible. Any amount over $10,000 subject 
to healthcare insurance rules and case management.   
 
Patients can pay for care in many different ways, such as by medical credit card or loan, 
general purpose credit card, insurance, or through a zero-interest payment plan. What are 
the costs and benefits for health care providers of offering each of these methods? Are there 
situations where one method of payment is more advantageous than another?  
As a small provider, I have to accept credit cards for these deductables or I wouldn’t be paid.  I 
lose 5% to the cost of credit card processing. I have no ability to finance long term payment 
plans. Large provider health systems have plenty of capital to support this as an option.  Thus, 
our current economic system empowers very large systems over small entrepreneurs and 
business owners.   
What incentives do financial services companies offer health care providers, including 
revenue-sharing or other financial or non-financial incentives? Largest incentive to take this 
product is time.   I’m having to pay a fee upfront to recoup 85% of the fee that would typically 
take me months to receive; and that is after I bug and nag and send people to collections.  We 
are failing people.   
 
The rich have the most free time, the rich never wait in line in person, don’t have to fax paper, 
don’t have to “go down to the agency”.  HCA or Kaiser can chase down $1000 when it has 
rooms of people to wait people out and lawyers to take people to small claims court.  See 
attached list of Non for Profit Hospital Cases at Small Claims Court.    
 
 

How do medical payment products and health insurance coverage interact? Do group health 
plan or health insurance issuer practices contribute to uptake of medical payment products 
by patients and providers?  The medical payment product market is a direct result of slow 
payments by insurance companies and pathetic plan design for high utilization procedures such 
as birth. Instead of innovating more efficient care delivery models and faster payments to 
incent quality; your plans are moving costs to higher deductibles.   
 
How many days do providers typically have to wait to be paid by plans or issuers versus by 
medical payment product companies or general purpose credit card companies? My 
credit/debit processor settles within 48 hours.  The fastest insurance plan can pay a claim in 
two weeks for a perfect claim.  The TPAs and Federal Exchange Plans can easily take up to 90 
days and that is based on us chasing them down repeatedly.  The TPA plans have the highest 
deductibles, thus the medical credit market was born.  ISO20022 predicts I’m paid in minutes.  
 
What factors, such as administrative requirements or clinical reviews, contribute to any 
differential resolution timelines?  Yes- because CMS requires fee for service claims as a 
requirement of participation. These claims are rekeyed by hand by person and people make 
many mistakes. We should be paid off of our clinical data in our EHRs.  
 
Please direct HHS, CMS, Office of the National Coordinator and Federal Reserve to pilot 4 
Corner payment models in 2023.  We’ve had the ONC and federally funded EHRs for 13 years.  
Why aren’t Plans paying on clinical data instead of claims starting with the most simple of 
pediatric and maternal/women’s health visits and birth?   You start at the beginning with the 
highly desired, predictable easy transactions. The best security against fraudulent payments is 
rapid payments incenting the provider to give up 100% transparent clinical data.   
 
Does a patient’s use of a medical payment product exempt them from certain consumer 
protections, provider requirements, or group health plan or health insurance issuer 
requirements? No. Not that I’m aware of.  
 
Are different types of health coverage treated differently?  
Yes.  Let’s consider the history of racial segregation on American pregnancy and birth. We are in 
a multi-payer Safety Net/FQHC/Academic Medical Center vs the Private Suburban and Rural 
markets fragmented reality.    As a result, we don’t have the Adam Smith economic market 
driving equity and outcomes.  We need the Federal Government to align agencies towards an 
outcome. Not all consumers have equal access to all Providers.      
 
Does health care provider organizational structure, including ownership by private equity, 
affect providers’ decisions to offer and promote these products?  
Sure.  Yes. Does this factor compare to taking or not taking low Medicaid payments ??  We 
wouldn’t exist if I were a non-for-profit.  Funding my own business was the only way to raise 
capital.  I take both states Medicaid.  
 

What are some best practices for health care providers who offer medical payment products 
in avoiding adverse financial and health impacts for patients? i. Are there specific tactics or 
practices that are well tailored and adapted for use by health care professionals in and 
serving underserved communities, including Tribal communities and geographically isolated 
communities?  
See great idea of funding first $10,000 for every pregnancy/child. Empower the people not the 
institutions.   
 
What actions should the agencies take to develop and encourage uptake of these established 
best practices? iii. Are there examples of actions or best practices at the State or local level to 
which the Federal government should look?  
Google “Child to College” and “Baby Bonds”.  There are many people across the political 
spectrum that would be likely to support the first $10,000 idea.  Invest in American family’s 
financial literacy during pregnancy and birth.  Set them up for success.   
 
To what extent are patients using medical payment products to pay bills that are incorrect, or 
that could be covered or defrayed by lower-cost alternatives?  
Better plan design for Birth; eg cover 100% and these products won’t have a market in 
maternity care.  Start there.   There is so much infertility due to untreated diabetes.  Let’s get 
healthcare for women right first.  
 
What billing errors may patients commonly encounter? 
Patient not eligible.  Not aware less than 26 years old are on their parent or step parent plan.  
Baby not included on Parent/Grandparent Plan.  Plan deems Provider not eligible or not in-
network.  Need one single CAQH like system.  The idea that you must credential your six 
providers with every plan and TPA is a terrible Provider burden and waste of everyone’s time.    
 
How does using a medical payment product affect patients’ rights to dispute incorrect bills?  
It shouldn’t.  That isn’t in our best interest.  Many providers game the system as an “out of 
network” provider.  We don’t. Using the medical payment plan is last resort assuming Mom is in 
good standing.  Again, we are talking about poor plan design with $4000 deductibles. New 
parents know the least about navigating insurance and have the least time to figure it out.  
 
Are certain groups of patients, such as members of specific underserved communities, more 
likely to experience medical billing errors or issues resolving disputes over bills paid using 
medical payment products? It is our experience that the most vulnerable working Americans, 
whether in the urban core or in rural communities have the most poorly designed benefits.  If 
they work for the school, they have high deductibles. If they work at a small business, they have 
high deductibles.   (NOTE- look at Nashville Public School and Vanderbilt for example of doing it 
right).  The inequity is that only the richest most affluent people working at corporate offices 
have the best benefits.  The poorest have access to Medicaid but equal access to all Providers. 
Ineligible Moms in labor are lucky if they are served when they walk into the ER under EMTALA.   
 

What actions should agencies consider taking to better understand the effects of medical 
payment products on consumers and the health care industry, educate consumers and 
providers about the risks of these products, and collect complaints?  
Send my RFI comments around.  You should start with fixing Birth.  This financial situation is 
depressing the birth rate.  There is a bureaucratic fear of addressing pregnancy head on due to 
abortion. Get healthy birth right. Increase likelihood good things can happen.   
 
What are some sources of data on medical payment products? What additional data are 
needed to understand the impact of medical payment products on patients and the health 
care industry?  Backward engineer Federal Exchange Plan claims with high deductibles.  
Analyze those CPTs. Ask direct questions. Ask the credit companies to give testimony.   
 
What data collection, data analysis, and research actions should agencies take? iii. Are there 
different or other actions that agencies should consider for underserved communities, 
including Tribal communities and geographically isolated communities?  
Identify and pay Community Health Workers in underserved, rural and Tribal communities to 
ask around.  People close to the trenches know the answers.  Have you asked your FQHC 
partners how people are making it work?  
 
What types of consumer complaints have States and localities received?  
No idea.  My complaint is that we OK every drug that comes on the market, but we can’t pay for 
a healthy birth that would make the drug not necessary in the future.  Our values are screwed 
up.  
 
Where medical payment products are causing harm, what are some specific levers for 
regulatory oversight and enforcement by Federal agencies that regulate financial products or 
health care providers?  
We are talking about outpatient procedures vs inpatient procedures right ?  These products are 
sold as loans vs credit cards…is a bank involved?  Who holds the funds for the Credit 
companies?  What regulatory oversight do you have over a clinic when the Plan isn’t Medicare?   
You don’t have that oversight at the federal level.  You should be pushing best practice out 
through the Federal Exchange Plans and Federal Employee Health Plan to impact BCBS, United 
and Centene.  You must partner with States and Boards of Nursing and Boards of Healing Arts 
to solicit and educate on complaints.  You can also check with malpractice companies.  
 
Are there specific areas for Federal enforcement actions? Are there examples of regulation or 
enforcement at the State or local level to which the Federal government should look? 
Go fix plan design first.  Skipping to law enforcement when we haven’t fixed the main problem 
is half our SDOH problems in this country. Focus on removing demand from the market.  
 
 
 
 

What complementary legislative actions are worth exploring? Where may additional 
statutory authority be needed?  
Identify the difference between the necessary use of these products that reflect policy failure 
and poor plan design (Birth) vs funding of Dog Hip Replacement (discretionary income).  And 
then use that data to inform legislative action.  
 
I have not used this type of product myself. I’m not going to comment on this section 
regarding Individuals.  
 
What actions should the CFPB consider taking to address problematic practices related to 
medical credit cards or loans, including debt collection and credit reporting practices ?   
Assess the reasons why the cards are being used the first place.  See above.  
 
How do firms offering medical financial products typically market to providers?  
We are cold-called/solicited through our licenses (public/purchasable), trade associations and 
membership organizations.  
 
How do creditors and their affiliates underwrite loans to patients? What specific factors (e.g., 
age, type of medical procedure, credit score, etc.) are considered in underwriting?  
I don’t know.  They seem to be happy to support “Birth” given the large deductibles described.  
Eg, “they have 75 providers in this space”.   
 
Do consumers understand the risks of paying medical bills via a medical credit card, 
installment loan, or other commercial payment product, including lowered ability to 
negotiate their bill with their provider?  
If their choices are being take to small claims court over their 20% co-pay and $3000 deductible 
or using a card; they are making a rational choice to open an account and pay the bill.  Do you 
see how close we are to debtor’s prisons? Garnishing wages for a healthcare bill?  
 
To what extent are alleged debts placed on medical credit cards and loans sent to debt 
collectors? How do medical payment product companies’ debt collection practices differ from 
those of health care providers, and are any issuer or provider debt collection practices posing 
risks to consumers? 
I have no idea how they differ.  Being threatened with court is scary.  People calling you day and 
night and calling your relatives is scary.  It puts you in a constant state of stress, depression, and 
leads to cardiac conditions.  It contributes to substance abuse.  See “these people are the ones 
who can least afford these large deductibles”.  
 
How can the CFPB use its authorities to ensure people with medical bills in collections, 
including medical payment product debt, are screened for eligibility for financial assistance 
and other benefits?  
You need a healthcare stabilization fund and availability fund as the “back up” for the indigent 
not yet eligible for Medicare, Medicaid and Disability SSI and SSID.   Google “healthcare 

stabilization fund” for examples of how states created funds as a last resort for provider 
malpractice.  
 
How are health care providers and financial companies using credit or “propensity to pay” 
scores to determine patients’ eligibility for financial assistance or medical payment products?  
I’m looking at their deductible.  If it’s over $1000 and there isn’t proof of payment plan/income, 
then they would meet criteria to receive information on the product.   
 
What are the implications for compliance with the Fair Credit Reporting Act or other CFPB 
authorities?  
No idea.  
 
When hospitals write off a patient’s debt as uncollectible or “bad debt” and cease attempts 
to collect, do they notify patients that collection attempts will cease?  
I don’t know.  Ask Hospitals.  Ask Ambulatory Surgery Centers. We provide a final letter that the 
person is in good standing if they make good faith attempts with us to pay their bill.  We are on 
a cash basis. Look at IRS policy how to lift up small healthcare providers with annual revenue 
less than 5 Million per year who are in-network with Medicaid.   
 
Would patients benefit from such notifications, and would such notifications reduce hospital 
revenue? See Ge Bai at John Hopkins. Jumbo non-for-profit hospitals suing its own patients.   
Where’s the charity care?  https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/abs/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.01627 
 
What actions should HHS consider taking to address problematic practices related to medical 
credit cards or loans, particularly as they relate to patients eligible for or enrolled in 
Medicare, Medicaid, or the Children’s Health Insurance Program, or patients enrolled in 
Affordable Care Act Marketplace plans?  
Start with the ACA Marketplace high deductible plans and paying for pregnancy and birth.   
This is a policy failure.  
 
What types of health insurance (Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance, etc.) are particularly 
associated with the likelihood that an individual is offered or makes use of medical credit 
cards and loans, and how does the type of health coverage affect relevant provider billing 
practices?  
ACA Marketplace plans followed by Self Insured Employers with Third Party Administrators are 
the WORST offenders creating the poor plan design circumstances where these products are 
needed.  Overlay high-deductible plans with low poverty requirements (must be very poor) to 
obtain Medicaid.  Here are your problem areas.  
 
Are there particular health care provider types that are most associated with being offered or 
offering medical payment products, and are these providers receiving directed payments or 
other incentives through State Medicaid programs?  
Certified Nurse Midwives and Birth Centers are not being solicited.  
 

Has the No Surprises Act and its surprise billing protections affected the prevalence and use 
of medical credit cards and loans, and if so, how? i. Has the notice and consent process been 
used to promote medical cards and loans to patients seeking health care items or services 
from out-of-network providers/facilities, and if so, how?  
We are just seeing the beginning of transparency for birth services come through on the 
Hospital Web Sites.  There is still much confusion as the Hospital isn’t clear on what is a Facility 
Charge vs the Professional Charge, Anesthesia, Facility for Mom, Facility Charge for Baby, 
Pediatrician bill.  Please come down on the Hospitals and make this crystal clear for a basic 
NVSD and a normal newborn. These are the #1 utilized hospital admissions and we still don’t 
have basic consumer transparency.  There are still many opportunities for “surprises”.  
 
For example, in instances where the No Surprises Act permits providers and facilities to seek 
notice and obtain consent from an insured patient to waive their balance billing and cost-
sharing protections under the No Surprises Act, are providers and facilities impermissibly 
attaching or incorporating medical card or loan documents or information to the notice and 
consent forms, or giving them to the patient at the same time as the notice and consent 
forms?  
I can’t speak to this. Talk to hospitals.  
 
What steps are health care providers and facilities putting into place to ensure that bills paid 
through medical payment products do not violate surprise billing requirements and that 
patients who use medical payment products retain their No Surprises Act rights?  
I can’t speak to this.  Talk to hospitals.  
How does or might the use of medical credit cards and loans affect the amount and timing of 
cost sharing a patient covered through Medicare, Medicaid, and/or the Affordable Care Act 
Marketplace owes for a covered service?  
It shouldn’t affect either.  The allowable should be the same.  
 
Are there any observable differences in cost sharing among patients belonging to 
underserved communities, such as Tribal communities or geographically isolated 
communities?   
Underserved and rural community members covered by ACA or Employer sponsored TPA plans 
tend to have higher co-insurance percentages and higher deductibles.  It isn’t fair at all.   
 
Hospital Price Transparency: What prices or versions of standard charges (e.g., cash prices) 
are offered to patients who sign up for a medical credit card or installment loan?  
I don’t know.  Ask the Hospitals.  
 
What steps are taken by health care providers to ensure these charges are adequately 
disclosed in accordance with hospital price transparency requirements? Do these charges 
reflect and specifically identify facility fees?  
We are just seeing the beginning of transparency for birth services come through on the 
Hospital Web Sites.  There is still much confusion as the Hospital isn’t clear on what is a Facility 
Charge vs the Professional Charge, Anesthesia, Facility for Mom, Facility Charge for Baby, 

Pediatrician. Please come down on the Hospitals and make the total cost for a basic NVSD and a 
normal newborn. These are the #1 utilized hospital admissions and we still don’t have basic 
consumer transparency.   
 
How might HHS improve patient understanding of options for covering the cost of medical 
treatments? At what points in the care process could patients be provided with information 
about their financial obligations and payment options?  
We should have the ability to purchase a birth bundle and see true apples to apples on quality 
with CNMs and Birth Centers. For the 1000th time, the family healthcare literacy journey starts 
when a woman is pregnant and gives birth. It’s the first time we use our insurance. You educate 
her and her partner on price transparency; you are educating her family for the lifespan.   She is 
family medical case manager 80% of the time.  Dear Treasury and Federal Reserve- invest in 
Mom/Partner Baby Financial Literacy as part of Pregnancy Childbirth Classes.  Let’s go pilot 
these together and invest in American families.  
 
What financial relationships exist between medical payment product companies and health 
care providers? For example, do companies provide financial incentives to providers who 
enroll patients in medical payment products?  
None to my knowledge.  It’s a service sold for a fee.   
 
Do providers pay financial companies to collect patients’ overdue balances? Or, do providers 
have arrangements with financial companies to indemnify the company in whole or in part if 
the patient defaults, such as an arrangement that when patients default on their debt to the 
financial company, the debt reverts to the provider?  
Yes, providers pay their billing companies to collect balances every day as part of the 5.75% we 
are charged to process claims on top of the 5% we lose to credit card processing fees for paid 
deductibles.  Some providers “sell” their debt to collection agencies.  Ask the big guys who do 
that- look them up by NAIC codes.   
 
Do health care providers or financial institutions market or recommend medical credit cards 
or loans to Federal health care program beneficiaries (e.g. Medicare, Medicaid, Affordable 
Care Act Marketplace, or Children’s Health Insurance Program enrollees)? Is the use of these 
products limited to certain types of health care items or services, such as items and services 
that are not reimbursable by Medicare or another third-party payor? 
Any time there is a high deductible plan being used to purchase an expensive service that is 
predictable, you will see the introduction of medical credit cards. Birth. Further, any time you 
segregate the market availability of a desirable service by payer, eg Medicaid not paying for 
orthodontics, weight reduction surgery or lasik, you will see medical credit cards.  
 
Do medical payment product companies recommend certain health care providers to their 
users?  
No idea. Ask the Medical Payment companies.  
 
 

Do companies limit where or how patients use medical credit cards?  
No idea.  Ask the Medical Payment companies.  
 
Is the health care provider (or the medical payment product company) offsetting some of the 
patient’s medical debt or providing any other incentives to the patient (e.g., travel rewards 
for charges to the card)?  
I don’t see this.  
 
What policy actions should Treasury consider taking to address problematic practices related 
to medical credit cards or loans, including debt collection and credit reporting practices, to 
conform with the existing tax laws and regulations pertaining to tax exempt hospitals? 
See IRS testimony from Ge Bai, John Hopkins.  The audacity of “non-for-profit” hospitals limiting 
access by Medicaid and non-eligible Mothers is well known in the birth community.  The 
hospital employs a Provider moat strategy that don’t accept Medicaid, self-pay or 
underperforming insurance plans.   The only way in is through an additional ER claim.   
 
Should a tax-exempt hospital’s signing patients up for medical payment products be 
considered similar to a tax-exempt hospital’s selling medical debt, such that the special rules 
that only exclude debt sales from being extraordinary collection actions if certain 
requirements are met would be applied to these payment products?  
On what basis should a tax-exempt hospital be selling medical debt when it has an obligation to 
provide charity care to retain its IRS status?  See Ge Bai and small Claims Court example.  
 
How would applying the debt sale special rules to payment products change hospitals’ and 
payment product providers’ current practices, especially those related to financial assistance 
eligibility screening, extraordinary collection actions, interest rates, and recall or return of 
balances owed by FAP-eligible individuals?  
I have no idea.  Ask the Hospitals.  
 
How do tax-exempt hospitals’ promotion of medical payment products compare to their 
operationalization of the requirement that their financial assistance policies be widely 
publicized?  
Please look into the largest Non-For-Profit IDNs in America, birth policies and drill into the 
Provider Moat/EMTALA reality.  
 
What are best practices for hospitals publishing and making patients aware of financial 
assistance programs (beyond compliance with the widely publicized requirements found in 
the section 501(r) regulations)? 
People don’t’ inquire where they aren’t allowed in the first place.  New hospitals are placing 
themselves within monitored/gated communities so they aren’t easily found by people who 
would need assistance.  Cross reference healthiest counties with new Hospitals.  
 
 

Are medical payment product companies advertising their products as delivering community 
benefits or as a form of financial assistance?  
See marketing material.  
 
Are tax-exempt hospitals claiming that their promotion of medical payment products delivers 
community benefits or provides financial assistance, including in their filings of Form 990, 
Schedule H?  
Ask Hospitals. 
 
Does the availability of medical payment products generally benefit the community or assist 
patients financially? 
They can serve as a financial tool for savvy consumers.  More likely, they are serving as a stop 
gap that reflects a failure in health plan design and health policy.  
 
 
In summary, the advent of medical credit cards in the pregnancy economy reflects a breakdown 
in US Federal healthcare policy and opportunity for innovation and care delivery 
transformation.  Please invite me and other small business owners like me to the table to 
contribute to solutions.   Thank you.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Kendra Wyatt, Chief Executive Officer  
kendra@newbirthcompany.com 
New Birth Company LLC  
9202 West 110th ST 
Overland Park, KS 66210 
(m) 816-210-8964 
