 
 
 
 
 
September 11, 2023 
 
 
To whom it may concern: 
 
The National Dental Association (NDA) submits this letter in response to the 
Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products issued by HHS, 
Treasury, and the CFPB.  The NDA’s mission is to promote oral health equity 
among people of color by harnessing the collective power of its members, 
advocating for the needs of and mentoring dental students of color, and raising 
the profile of the profession in our communities.  Among other goals, the NDA 
seeks to improve the delivery of oral health care in underserved communities.    
 
The RFI describes a variety of concerns that generally relate to two specific 
issues: (i) access to health care and (ii) whether the health care ecosystem (e.g., 
providers, hospitals, lenders) properly supports patients in connection with 
billing for care.  We appreciate these concerns and share the desire to expand 
access to oral health care, especially in underserved communities.  
Regarding access to health care, the agencies know that solutions to this issue 
go well beyond how providers bill and how patients pay for care.  NDA supports 
comprehensive health care reform1 that provides coverage for all persons and 
universal access.    
 
Unfortunately, the RFI is not an invitation to discuss the needed reform of the 
health care system.  Instead, it focuses on how consumers pay for care, 
primarily in hospitals and medical settings.  But, the RFI’s scope reaches into 
other aspects of health care, including oral health care.  The NDA shares the 
agencies’ concerns around access to care, but the RFI appears to have 
misdiagnosed the problem.  The RFI suggests that patients’ access to credit to 
pay for health care somehow restricts access or choices relating to health 
care.  In fact, the opposite is true.  Our members work with patients daily who 
need oral health care with meaningful out-of-pocket expenses not otherwise 
covered by insurance.  In fact, the RFI references how medical payment 
products were once used primarily to pay for care not traditionally covered by 
health insurance plans, such as dental and vision care.  That remains the case 
today, as often, the only way the patient can receive the needed care is through 
the use of credit.  This could be through a credit card (such as a Mastercard, 
Visa, or CareCredit), installment loan, or other type of credit.  Without access to 
that credit, the patient may need to forego the recommended and desired 
treatment.  Indeed, access to credit is a critical component of oral health 
equity.  Without access to credit, oral health care would be restricted to those 
who happen to have cash on hand.  This would have a significant disparate 
impact on communities of color.   

We do not believe the agencies intend to restrict access to care or reverse progress on health equity, 
and we urge you to proceed cautiously to avoid such an outcome.  
 
We also note that the RFI suggests mistreatment of patients in connection with billing practices is 
pervasive in the healthcare community.  As it relates to NDA and its members, this is also not the 
case.  NDA and its members are the vanguard of oral health in communities of color.  Our goal is to 
perpetuate the tradition and upgrade the stature of African-American dentists in service to the minority 
community.  The lack of provider compassion cited in the RFI is entirely inconsistent with our 
profession's ethics, especially the ethics of NDA’s members.  In all cases, the NDA supports medical 
payment products designed to provide access to quality healthcare and improve patient outcomes that 
are consistent with appropriate billing and collection practices and do not negatively impact and target 
underserved and vulnerable populations, their home and job security, credit scores, and overall health 
outcomes.  
 
The NDA appreciates the opportunity to share its views on the RFI.  We urge the agencies to continue to 
work toward health equity and access to care.  This would include ensuring a variety of credit options 
remain available to patients.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Dr. Marlon D. Henderson                                                                                      
President, NDA   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Kim B. Perry 
Chairman of the Board, NDA 
