Discover ﬁnancing
that ﬁts your needs.
Explore aﬀordable payment options
for your purchase.

Apply for the 
ﬁnancing you 
need today.

Financing available
from $500 to $25,000*
Simple, fast online application
Aﬀordable monthly payments
Competitive interest rates,
including Promotional
Financing oﬀers**
No prepayment penalties
*Some applicants may qualify for more. Actual loan amount and term depend 
on credit usage and history.
**Lender Promotional Financing availability and terms vary. Interest may 
accrue, which will be payable if loan is not paid in full within promotional 
period. Prior to accepting a Promotional Financing oﬀer, see loan contracts for 
full details.

Easy application
It only takes a few minutes 
to complete the simple 
online application
More options
Access multiple ﬁnancing options 
with aﬀordable interest rates and
payment terms
Fast approval
You’ll receive a response from 
our lender network the same 
business day
Aﬀordable ﬁnancing
Find a payment plan that ﬁts your 
needs and your budget
Superior service
Your dedicated support rep will 
answer all your questions and 
help you through the entire 
application process

Frequently asked questions
What does United Credit oﬀer?
United Credit helps consumers within a wide range of credit 
scores apply for ﬁnancing with multiple lenders, meaning we 
connect more people like you with the loan you need. We are 
not a lender; instead, we are a gateway to lenders who provide 
installment loans and other ﬁnancing options with aﬀordable 
interest rates and payment terms. Loans from our lender network 
vary based on your credit application.
What are the requirements for approval?
Each of our lending partners has unique requirements and takes 
multiple factors into consideration, including but not limited to 
income, credit proﬁle, and outstanding debt balances. In many 
cases, all you need is a valid ID and a veriﬁed mailing address    
to qualify. 
How does the ﬁnancing process work?
Afer you complete an online application, we will submit it to our 
lender network. If you pre-qualify, you will receive a ﬁnancing 
option within minutes (or up to one business day) afer the 
application is submitted. 
If one of our lending partners approves your loan request, we 
may contact you to review the terms and conditions. Once the 
terms are accepted and any stipulations are provided, the lender 
will disburse the funds you have requested.
How do I make payments?
Once your loan is approved, you’ll work directly with the lender 
to make payments.
 When is my ﬁrst payment due?
The exact terms of your loan will be determined by your lender. 
However, most lenders require payment 1 month afer purchase. 

We’re here to help you get
the loan you need.
Apply now for aﬀordable ﬁnancing and
discover your options today.+
Together, we do more
855-503-1800
UnitedCredit.com
+United Credit is NOT a lender. We simply send your information to our lender 
network for approval and credit terms. Credit approval is not guaranteed.
Please refer to our complete Terms and Conditions at
 unitedcredit.com/terms-and-conditions.
