 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 11, 2023 
 
Via electronic mail to:  MedicalDebtRFI_2023@cfpb.gov 
 
Rohit Chopra, Director  
 
 
 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
1700 G Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20552 
 
 
Chiquita Brooks-LaSure, Administrator  
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Attention: Docket No. CMS–2023–0106 
P.O. Box 8010  
 
            
Baltimore, MD 21244–8010 
Thomas C. West Jr., Deputy Assistant 
Secretary for Tax Policy 
Department of the Treasury 
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, D.C. 20220 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Re: Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products (Docket No. CFPB–2023–0038; 
Docket No. CMS–2023–0106; Docket No. TREAS–DO–2023–0008). 
 
The Bank Policy Institute1 and the Consumer Bankers Association2 are providing these comments 
in response to the Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products issued by the Consumer 
Financial Protection Bureau, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the United States 
Treasury Department.3  The agencies assert that they “seek comment on policy options to address 
practices by health care providers, health insurance issuers, employer-sponsored health plans, and 
financial companies that result in consumers paying excess costs” and that the “RFI builds upon recent 
work by CFPB, HHS, Treasury, and other Federal agencies to assist consumers with managing health care 
 
1 The Bank Policy Institute is a nonpartisan public policy, research and advocacy group, representing the nation’s 
leading banks and their customers.  Our members include universal banks, regional banks and the major foreign 
banks doing business in the United States.  Collectively, they employ almost 2 million Americans, make nearly half 
of the nation’s bank-originated small business loans, and are an engine for financial innovation and economic 
growth. 
2 CBA is the only national trade association focused exclusively on retail banking.  Established in 1919, the 
association is a leading voice in the banking industry and Washington, representing members who employ nearly 
two million Americans, extend roughly $3 trillion in consumer loans, and provide $270 billion in small business 
loans.  
3 88 Fed. Reg. 44281 (July 12, 2023).   

2 
 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
 
September 11, 2023 
Department of the Treasury 
Department of Health and Human Services 
 
 
 
 
costs and medical bills, and to protect patients and consumers from paying inaccurate or inflated 
medical bills.”4   
 
The agencies’ stated goals are “to lower health care costs and reduce the burden of medical 
debt,” and we encourage continued work and engagement on those fronts by the appropriate agencies 
and policymakers.5  The RFI’s purported focus on “medical payment products,” however, is misplaced. 
The RFI recites a series of criticisms about health care costs and the practices of providers, hospitals, and 
insurance companies that the agencies believe harm consumers and attempts to draw a causal 
connection between those concerns and so-called “medical payment products.”  First, the term “medical 
payment product” is not defined and does not constitute a separate product category in the 
marketplace.  There are simply different options available to consumers to pay for medical care and 
services just as they pay for any other goods or services in the economy.   
 
Second, it is surprising that the agencies do not attempt to determine whether the presence of 
multiple payment options, including credit options, actually expands consumers’ ability to obtain health 
care.  The RFI includes one brief statement that “[i]n some cases, medical payment products may allow 
patients to access care they would otherwise have to forgo,” but otherwise does not engage in any 
discussion about the benefits that result from consumers having credit options—including “medical 
payment products”—to pay for health care.6  These expanded options that allow for additional ways to 
fund medical treatment would seem to overwhelmingly benefit consumers. 
 
Rather than seeking to understand whether payment options benefit consumers, the RFI makes 
several assertions that “medical payment products” “may” cause or exacerbate the high cost of care or 
other aspects of the healthcare ecosystem that the agencies disfavor.  But the RFI provides no 
evidentiary support for those assertions.  This is likely because there is no such evidence:  the way 
consumers pay for medical care – whether through a “medical payment product” or through any other 
means a consumer uses to pay for care – has no bearing on:  
 
• 
The pricing of medical services by providers, hospitals, or insurance companies; 
• 
The coverage provided by insurance companies; 
• 
Access to insurance in the United States; 
 
4 88 Fed. Reg at 44282. This statement, however, cites only two White House Fact Sheets about medical debt: The 
White House, “FACT SHEET: New Data Show 8.2 Million Fewer Americans Struggling with Medical Debt Under the 
Biden-Harris Administration” (Feb 14, 2023), available at:  FACT SHEET: New Data Show 8.2 Million Fewer 
Americans Struggling with Medical Debt Under the Biden-Harris Administration | The White House and The White 
House, “FACT SHEET: The Biden Administration Announces New Actions to Lessen the Burden of Medical Debt and 
Increase Consumer Protection” (April 11, 2022), available at:  https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2022/04/11/fact-sheet-the-biden-administration-announces-new-actions-to-lessen-the-
burden-of-medical-debt-and-increase-consumer-protection/.   
5 88 Fed. Reg. at 44281.  
6 88 Fed. Reg. at 44282.  
 

3 
 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
 
September 11, 2023 
Department of the Treasury 
Department of Health and Human Services 
 
 
 
 
• 
Hospitals’, providers’, or insurance companies’ billing practices or reimbursement policies;  
• 
Inaccurate or inflated medical bills; 
• 
Hospitals’ failing to offer or provide charity or reduced cost care; or 
• 
Unlawful medical industry debt collection or reporting. 
 
Healthcare providers, hospitals, and insurance companies set the costs for medical care that is 
criticized in the RFI, not credit card issuers, debit card issuers, or banks.  Financial institutions merely 
provide different payment products that consumers may use to purchase goods and services across the 
economy.  As noted, rather than being harmful to consumers, as the RFI contends, the fact that 
consumers have different options to pay for healthcare costs is in fact a benefit to consumers that the 
RFI does not acknowledge, which seems to be at odds with the CFPB’s mandate to ensure that 
consumers have access to markets for consumer financial products and services that are fair, 
transparent, and competitive.7  We expand on these points below.  
 
I. 
The availability of different means of payment expands consumers’ access to health care. 
 
The availability of different means of payment for healthcare services provides consumers with 
important benefits.  For example, by having more choices to fund necessary or desired healthcare, 
consumers are more frequently able to access such care.  Absent payment options, consumers may be 
limited to paying for healthcare services at the time services are rendered using immediately available 
funds, such as cash.  However, many consumers do not have access to sufficient funds to pay the full cost 
of a particular healthcare service using liquid funds.  Having different options to pay for medical care, 
each with different terms and features, provides consumers with the ability to select a payment product 
that best suits his or her individual needs and finances.   
 
For example, consumers’ ability to defer payment for health care (e.g., through use of a credit card 
or installment loan) enables consumers who do not have access to sufficient funds to cover the entire 
cost of a healthcare service at the time of service to nevertheless be able to access that service or care 
by paying over time.  Thus, the availability of payment tools that allow for deferred payment expands 
access to health care, just as the availability of deferred payments makes homes, cars, and many other 
goods and services more accessible.  This fact is barely acknowledged in the RFI.  Nor do the agencies 
make any attempt to solicit information about how “medical payment products” or the availability of 
credit more generally expands access to medical care and the benefits provided to consumers by such 
expanded access.  While we do not believe that regulating or restricting the availability of payment 
products would address the issues the agencies highlight in the RFI, as described herein, should the 
agencies consider any future regulatory or other action, the agencies must consider these questions.   
 
 
  
 
7 12 U.S.C. § 5511(a). 

4 
 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
 
September 11, 2023 
Department of the Treasury 
Department of Health and Human Services 
 
 
 
 
II. 
The RFI wrongly attributes the high cost of health care and harmful practices of healthcare 
providers, hospitals, and insurance companies to the availability of “medical payment 
products.” 
 
The RFI criticizes the high cost of healthcare and insufficient insurance, charity, and reduced-cost 
care benefits and suggests that consumers are being harmed by the ways in which hospitals and medical 
providers charge, bill, and communicate with consumers about medical services, insurance and other 
benefits, and payment for those services.  The RFI attempts to attribute these ills in part to the 
availability of “medical payment products.”  But this attempt to lay blame on those products specifically– 
and indeed the suggestion that the availability of different payment options (including “medical payment 
products”) somehow drives healthcare costs set by providers, hospitals, and insurance companies – is 
misguided and not grounded in evidence.   
 
The RFI is rife with unsupported statements attempting to draw a causal link between the availability 
of options to pay for healthcare and the criticisms of the healthcare system more broadly, as articulated 
by the agencies in the RFI.  For example, the RFI states that:  
 
• 
“Health care providers may be incentivized to promote medical credit cards and loans 
because these products result in faster payment, lower administrative costs, and more 
revenue overall for the health care provider.8   
 
• 
“Easy access to credit may encourage patients to consume more health care from providers 
who offer medical credit products, resulting in more overall revenue for these providers.”9   
 
• 
“Providers may turn to medical payment products in response to growing deductibles, 
copayments, and coinsurance charged by private group health plans and health insurance 
issuers, which many patients cannot afford to pay in cash up front;”10 
 
• 
“[S]low insurance reimbursement and frequent insurance denials, downcoding, or appeals 
may also make medical payment products an attractive alternative to insurance payment;”11  
 
• 
“Availability of medical payment products may enable health care providers to charge 
higher prices to uninsured, self-pay, or out-of-network patients who would otherwise be 
unable to pay such prices and might instead seek more affordable care;”12 and  
 
 
8 88 Fed. Reg at 44286 (emphasis added). 
9 Id. (internal citations omitted; emphasis added). 
10 Id. (emphasis added). 
11 Id. (emphasis added). 
12 88 Fed. Reg at 44285 (emphasis added). 

5 
 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
 
September 11, 2023 
Department of the Treasury 
Department of Health and Human Services 
 
 
 
 
• 
“Health care providers might offer medical payment products to uninsured patients instead 
of helping these patients determine their eligibility for health insurance coverage through 
medicaid, medicare, or subsidized marketplace plans.”13   
 
But the RFI fails to provide any evidence that the availability of payment options for health care has 
any bearing on the cost of care, patients’ access to or use of insurance, or the practices of insurance 
companies, providers, or hospitals.  Regardless of what methods are available to pay for care, if care that 
consumers wish to access is not covered by some benefit, such as an insurance plan or charity care, 
patients will have to pay “out of pocket” in some fashion, which is one of the main criticisms underlying 
the RFI.  The availability of options to finance that “out of pocket” cost is a benefit to consumers who 
otherwise may not be able to access those services.   
 
The fundamental criticisms of the cost of care and the practices of providers, hospitals, and 
insurance companies, which lie at the heart of the RFI, can only be changed by those entities themselves 
or by legislators or other policymakers with authority over those entities.  The concerns highlighted in 
the RFI cannot be solved by eliminating or restricting consumers’ access to payment products that may 
be used for healthcare costs; if card products or other payment methods were prohibited or restricted 
from being used to pay for medical care or services, the concerns highlighted in the RFI would persist: 
healthcare providers, hospitals, and insurance companies would continue to set the costs for medical 
care and engage in the practices criticized in the RFI.  Credit card issuers, banks, and other financial 
institutions have no control or influence over those functions. 
 
Moreover, consumers may actually be worse off, as they would have fewer options to pay for 
medical care or treatment.  Without the ability to pay for desired medical care through credit cards or 
other products offered through well-regulated financial institutions, such as banks, consumers may be 
forced to turn to less-regulated consumer credit providers, such as payday lenders, to cover the costs of 
the medical care sought or to simply forego needed or desired medical services. 
 
III. 
Deferred interest promotions provide consumers with expanded options to obtain products 
and services, including medical care. 
 
The RFI also criticizes the offering by “medical payment products” of “complex deferred interest 
promotions, which consumers often do not understand fully, and which can significantly increase the 
cost of their care if they do not pay in full during the promotional period.”14  Yet these statements are 
not supported, and indeed are contradicted by, the Bureau’s own data. 
 
First, deferred interest promotions are not unique to any particular product or card or to the 
healthcare industry but are offered in connection with a variety of cards and other payment products.  
 
13 Id. (emphasis added). 
14 88 Fed. Reg. at 44284, note 23.  

6 
 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
 
September 11, 2023 
Department of the Treasury 
Department of Health and Human Services 
 
 
 
 
These promotions are popular with consumers because they understand the product and the benefit it 
affords them – namely the ability to obtain an interest-free loan.15   
 
Second, the agencies provide no support for the allegation that deferred interest is “complex” or 
somehow confusing to consumers.  To the extent consumers’ understanding of deferred interest has 
been surveyed, the Bureau’s own 2015 CARD Act Report concluded that the Bureau’s focus group 
research revealed that most consumers did understand that paying the minimum payment amount 
would not be sufficient to pay off the deferred interest balance in full before the end of the promotional 
period.16  In addition, virtually all consumer finance products and services are subject to extensive 
disclosure requirements administered by the Bureau.17  The CFPB’s regulations specifically address how 
lenders should disclose the terms associated with deferred interest financing.18   
 
The agencies also allege that deferred interest promotions can “significantly increase the cost of 
their care if [consumers] do not pay in full during the promotional period.”  However, deferred interest 
promotions do not increase the cost of credit relative to what the interest would be if the balance 
accrued interest at the time of the initial transaction.  Moreover, the RFI fails to note that deferred 
interest promotions actually reduce the cost of credit for the vast majority of consumers who take 
advantage of the promotional period to repay the balance in full.  The Bureau’s most recent CARD Act 
Report found that in connection with deferred interest plans, repayment rates within the promotional 
period have generally increased since the Bureau last reported this rate, with the most recent promotion 
payoff rate being 81 percent.19  The CFPB’s Report that focused specifically on “Medical Credit Cards and 
 
15 The Bureau’s most recent Card Act Report issued in 2021 explains that “[d]eferred interest promotions are a large 
feature of the retail consumer credit card market.  Almost always associated with private label and retail co-brand 
cards, deferred interest promotions are generally presented to consumers as an option to finance larger purchases” 
and notes that these promotions “remain generally popular with consumers, with purchase volumes relatively 
high despite pandemic-era disruptions in retail sales.”  (emphasis added).  See CFPB, The Consumer Credit Card 
Market (Sept. 2021) at 91-93, available at https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_consumer-credit-
card-market-report_2021.pdf 
16 See CFPB, The Consumer Credit Card Market (Dec. 2015) at 152, note 20, available at: 201512_cfpb_report-the-
consumer-credit-card-market.pdf (consumerfinance.gov).  
17 For example, the Truth in Lending Act and Regulation Z administered by the CFPB require comprehensive, 
uniform disclosures of the terms and conditions for open-end credit products.  15 U.S.C. § 1601 et seq. and 12 
CFR 1026.5–1026.16. 
18 See, e.g., 12 C.F.R.§ 1026.7(b)(14); Comment 1026.7(b)(1).   
19 Specifically, the Bureau’s 2021 Report explained that its “2015 Report found that overall promotion-level and 
balance-level payoff rates from 2009 to 2013 lay between 76 and 82 percent.  The Bureau’s 2017 Report found that 
promotion payoff rates on six-to-17-month promotions originated in 2015 were 72 percent, and balance payoff 
rates were 74 percent.  This report finds promotion payoff rates of 81 percent and balance payoff rates of 82 
percent in 2020, a marked increase from previous years.  Cardholders of all credit score tiers increased payoff rates 
in 2020, but the effect was most notable for consumers with below-prime scores.”  See CFPB, The Consumer Credit 
Card Market (Sept. 2021) at 97 (internal citations omitted), available at:  
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_consumer-credit-card-market-report_2021.pdf.   

7 
 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
 
September 11, 2023 
Department of the Treasury 
Department of Health and Human Services 
 
 
 
 
Financing Plans” found similarly high promotion payoff rates – between 2018 and 2020, the payoff rate 
was nearly 80 percent, hitting a low of 76 percent in 2020.20   
 
Thus, the RFI presents a one-sided, negative view of deferred interest promotions, asserting that 
these programs can increase the cost of care, but failing to mention that most consumers realize 
significant benefit from taking advantage of deferred interest programs.  
 
IV. 
Conclusion 
 
We appreciate the opportunity to comment on the RFI.  However, we do not believe that the 
agencies’ will achieve their goals of lowering health care costs and reducing the burden of medical debt 
by seeking to further regulate or even eliminate “medical payment products” or by focusing on the way 
in which consumers pay for health care more broadly.  Consumers benefit from having different payment 
options with various features that meet different consumers’ needs and preferences.  The concerns 
regarding the practices of health care providers, hospitals, and insurance companies that the RFI seeks to 
remedy are best addressed head-on by Congress, state legislatures, insurance regulators, or other 
appropriate policymakers and not via the backdoor channel of attempting to regulate the payment 
options available to consumers for healthcare services.  
 
* * * * * 
 
 
If you have any questions, please contact Paige Pidano Paridon by phone at 703-887-5229 or email at 
paige.paridon@bpi.com. 
 
 
  
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Paige Pidano Paridon  
    
Senior Vice President,  
    
Senior Associate General Counsel  
    
Bank Policy Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shelley Thompson 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vice President, 
Associate General Counsel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Bankers Association  
 
20 CFPB, “Medical Credit Cards and Financing Plans” (May 2018) at 18; available at: cfpb_medical-credit-cards-and-
financing-plans_2023-05.pdf.  
