 
 
September 11, 2023 
 
Chiquita Brooks-LaSure, JD 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Baltimore, MD 21244–8010 
 
Rohit Chopra 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
1700 G St. NW 
Washington, D.C. 20552 
 
Janet Yellin, PhD 
Department of the Treasury 
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, D.C. 20220 
Comments submitted electronically via Regulations.gov 
 
RE: Docket No. CFPB–2023–0038; Docket No. TREAS–DO–2023–0008; Docket No. CMS–2023–0106 
 
Dear Administrator Brooks-LaSure, Director Chopra, and Secretary Yellen: 
 
The American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS) is the world's largest association of plastic surgeons, 
representing over 8,000 members who comprise 94 percent of board-certified plastic surgeons in the United 
States. Our members are highly skilled surgeons who improve both the functional capacity and quality of life 
for patients, including the treatment of congenital anomalies, burn injuries, traumatic injuries, hand 
conditions, post-cancer reconstruction, and a variety of elective aesthetic treatments. I am writing on behalf 
of our members in response to your joint request for information about medical payment products. 
 
We view medical payment products as an essential tool for consumers in the aesthetic medicine space. 
While your RFI suggests that the availability of credit reduces access to care, we believe the opposite is true. 
Aesthetic medicine is not covered by insurance, and for many patients who want aesthetic treatments, 
access to credit is the only way that they can access that care. Maintaining patients’ access to aesthetic 
treatments is critical because these surgical and non-surgical procedures enhance and reshape structures of 
the body to improve patients’ appearance and confidence. Aesthetic treatments lead to better health 
outcomes for patients by improving mental health and reducing health risks associated with obesity.  
 
Of the financing options available to patients, we believe that credit cards with low or zero interest 
promotional rates are among the best. For over twenty years, we have endorsed one such financing option, 
CareCredit, to the plastic surgeons that comprise our membership, and our members and their patients 
report very high satisfaction with the product. This is not surprising when one considers CareCredit’s 
reputation among its cardholders, as reflected in its net promoter score (NPS), which is a benchmark used to 
evaluate consumer sentiment. CareCredit’s NPS of 76 is not just exceptionally high for a credit card – the 
consumer finance industry average is 42 – but across all industries. An NPS of 76 places CareCredit in the 

realm of companies known for high customer satisfaction and excellent service like Costco (NPS of 80) and 
USAA Bank (NPS of 72). This is a product that our patients like. 
 
Perhaps that is why, as the RFI notes, “Available data, although limited, show significant growth in the 
medical payment product industry over the last several years. CareCredit grew from 4.4 million cardholders 
and 177,000 participating providers in 2013 to 11.7 million cardholders and over 250,000 participating 
health care providers in 2023.” Rather than being a sign of something wrong, we see this as evidence that 
CareCredit is offering a good product that patients are satisfied with. 
 
A part of that satisfaction is related to payment terms. While the RFI presents deferred interest as some sort 
of pernicious mechanism designed to trap consumers into higher payments, the reality is that it offers 
patients a route to interest-free credit. It affords them the ability to pay over time, helping them stay within 
a monthly household budget while accessing quality healthcare. Options like deferred interest financing have 
been, and continue to be, an important tool for our members and their patients in making desired care a 
reality. 
 
Another reason we endorse CareCredit to our members is because of the training the company provides to 
ensure that providers and office staff are adequately educating patients on the nature and terms of their 
financing options. CareCredit requires our members and their patient-facing staff to complete a robust, 
multi-modal certification training course every two years about the CareCredit program that emphasizes 
how to properly and thoroughly explain to patients how promotional financing works. Further, our members’ 
contracts with CareCredit contain “Transparency Principles” which require that all consumer-facing 
employees and promotional materials inform CareCredit customers about all financing options available to 
them, and how those promotions work, before choosing which option to use for their specific purchase. This 
is vital, because credit cards marketed within the health and wellness space are subjected to the same 
federal consumer protection laws as any other credit card. CareCredit is required to provide clear and 
conspicuous disclosures to help consumers clearly understand how their financing products work. Applicants 
must demonstrate that they are creditworthy and satisfy federally mandated “ability to pay” requirements in 
order to receive a CareCredit credit card. 
 
Our members do not want to provide elective aesthetic services to patients who cannot afford the care, and 
we take exception to the notion that our members may, as the RFI states, “promote medical payment 
products because the use of these products allows providers to avoid the administrative burden of slow and 
complex insurance reimbursement, outsource servicing and collections costs, get paid faster, and receive 
payment from people who otherwise would not pay the full price for care.” We also take exception to the 
assertion that patients “do not know alternatives exist, they do not understand the risks and costs of medical 
payment products, or they feel pressured or coerced into signing up for these products.” Likewise, it is 
completely untrue that our members “may also use these payment products to attempt to avoid restrictions 
on credit reporting and debt collection practices that otherwise apply to medical debt, including restrictions 
imposed by national credit reporting companies and restrictions imposed by Federal law.” Beyond the fact 

that these statements reveal a staggeringly negative view of healthcare providers, likening them to a breed 
of amoral swindlers, they also demonstrate a fundamental misunderstanding of the business model of 
aesthetic medicine.  
 
Plastic surgeons build aesthetic practices largely through word-of-mouth referral, through long-term 
relationships wherein patients return to the practice (in some cases, many times) for their aesthetic medical 
needs, and – most critically – through reputation in the community. Our members like CareCredit because 
their patients like it. If they were coercing patients into taking risky credit terms in order to pay for care that 
patients cannot afford, our members would be risking their own reputations. That is simply not how plastic 
surgeons go about managing their practices, to say nothing of the fact that were they to engage in such 
practices they would be violating well-established ethical codes, such as the ASPS Code of Ethics,1 to which 
they are held accountable by ASPS.  
 
ASPS appreciates the opportunity to offer these comments in response to your RFI. We agree that there is a 
great and growing problem with respect to the affordability of healthcare, but we question your angle of 
approach with respect to this issue. Medical payment products help patients afford life-changing medical care. 
To the extent that they are used for non-elective services, we would encourage you to consider both the costs of 
healthcare outside of physician services (the cost of physician services has grown at lower rates than other 
aspects of healthcare that impact patient cost-sharing2) and the decreasing quality of insurance networks and 
coverage provided by insurance products. Those are the areas in covered care where cost is outpacing patients’ 
capacity. If anything, the growth in financing options to help patients meet their cost-sharing obligation when 
insurance covers a service is a symptom of that problem, and that problem is fundamentally different and 
distinct from provider fees. 
 
Should you have any questions about our comments, please contact Patrick Hermes, ASPS Director of 
Government Relations, Political Affairs, and Health & Payment Policy, at phermes@plasticsurgery.org. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Gregory Greco, DO, FACS  
President, American Society of Plastic Surgeons 
 
 
1 https://www.plasticsurgery.org/documents/Governance/asps-code-of-ethics.pdf 
2 See https://www.ama-assn.org/system/files/medicare-spending-enrollee.pdf and https://www.ama-assn.org/system/files/medicare-
updates-inflation-chart-cumulative.pdf 
