 
 
 
 
55 Marietta Street NW    Suite 903    Atlanta GA  30303    [P] 404.525.1085   georgiawatch.org 
 
September 11, 2023 
 Via Electronic Submission Only: www.regulations.gov 
  
Director Rohit Chopra, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
Secretary Xavier Becerra, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Secretary Janet Yellen, Department of the Treasury 
  
Re: Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products, 
CFPB-2023-0038 / CMS-2023-0106 / TREAS-DO-2023-0008 
  
Dear Director Chopra, Secretary Becerra, and Secretary Yellen: 
  
We submit the following comments in response to the Request for Information Regarding 
Medical Products (RFI) issued by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), the 
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and the Department of the Treasury 
(Treasury). We are pleased that your Agencies are seeking to understand the effects that 
medical credit cards, loans, and other financial products have on patients and the 
healthcare system. 
 
Georgia Watch is a consumer advocacy organization with a long history of advocating in 
the financial protection and healthcare access space. Our team works to ensure barriers 
to quality, affordable healthcare are removed for all Georgians. Through our consumer 
helpline, we often hear stories of individuals struggling to maneuver the intricacies of the 
healthcare system, particularly when it comes to billing and debt. According to the Kaiser 
Family Foundation, over 100,000 Georgians have more than $120 million in medical debt. 
From our direct experience assisting consumers, we know that many of these debt-
burdened individuals would have qualified for financial assistance but were not offered it. 
Georgians need real solutions already available to your Agencies to prevent the 
incurrence of debilitating debt when accessing needed healthcare.  
 
We share the concerns of our partners at the National Consumer Law Center (NCLC) and 
Community Catalyst that medical payment products are further complicating an already 
complex process to receive and pay for needed care. We are particularly concerned 
about NCLC’s research indicating a higher susceptibility of vulnerable populations to use 
these more expensive products, including older adults and immigrant communities. 
Seeking basic and emergency care should not be an entry point for consumers to get 
swept into misleading and unnecessary products and services.  

 
 
 
 
55 Marietta Street NW    Suite 903    Atlanta GA  30303    [P] 404.525.1085   georgiawatch.org 
 
 
Medical credit cards often come with high interest rates and hidden fees, which can swiftly 
escalate the overall cost of medical procedures and services. Moreover, the complex 
terms and conditions of these cards can be misleading, leaving consumers vulnerable to 
accumulating debt they may struggle to repay and potentially impacting their credit 
scores. While medical credit cards can offer financial relief in times of medical need, they 
also demand careful consideration and informed decision-making to avoid the potentially 
detrimental consequences of excessive debt and financial strain. 
 
Consumers in Georgia have filed numerous complaints with the CFPB expressing that 
interest rates attached to these products are so high that it makes it difficult to move the 
needle on the actual debt owed. Georgians also share that when applying for medical 
credit cards, such as CareCredit, hidden promotions result in exponential increases in 
interest after the promotional period. 
 
We agree with solutions proposed by Community Catalyst and partners and ask that the 
CFPB: (1) prohibit the offering and promotion of deferred interest credit cards in health 
care settings; and (2) ban the inclusion of all medical debt on credit reports. We ask that 
HHS: (1) enact Conditions of Participation to reduce hospital debt and prohibit the most 
harmful collection actions by hospitals; and (2) address high rates of denials by private 
insurance companies and by Medicaid managed care organizations (Medicaid MCOs). 
Finally, we ask that Treasury: (1) strengthen and enforce current regulations for nonprofit 
hospitals relating to financial assistance policies and collection actions; and (2) reinstate 
previous guidance requiring nonprofit hospitals to provide charity care. 
 
Georgia Watch and our partners are committed to ensuring that consumers can access 
necessary medical care without the fear of insurmountable debt. We thank the Agencies 
for their coordinated efforts to gain information regarding medical payment products. We 
urge the Agencies to continue prioritizing collaboration in addressing the underlying causes 
of medical debt.  
 
On behalf of Georgia consumers, thank you for your consideration of these comments. 
 
Sincerely,  
Elizabeth B. Coyle 
Executive Director 
