From:
Stephanie
To:
MedicalDebtRFI_2023
Subject:
[Docket No. CFPB-2023-0038]
Date:
Monday, July 10, 2023 7:34:12 PM
CAUTION: This email originated from a non-government domain. DO NOT click links or open attachments unless
you recognize and/or trust the sender. Contact Cybersecurity Incident Response Team (CSIRT) at 202-435-7200 or
report a suspicious email.
Director Chopra:
 
Here is my input based on 14 years of experience using Care Credit.
 
I have been able to finance dental procedures, cataract surgery, pet surgery, dentures, high vet bills,
MRI’s, and other medical bills through Care Credit.  All have been through extended 0% financing.  At
the time of these procedures there were no other 0% extended financing alternatives.  Thus I have
been able to obtain quality medical care without exhausting savings or filing bankruptcy or going
without needed medical care.
 
Every time I have used Care Credit, the agreements presented to me and on my monthly Care Credit
Statement have clearly stated that if the balance is not paid in full by the end of the extended term, I
will be liable for interest from the initial date and the interest rate has been clearly stated.  The
interest rates are no different that standard credit cards. I TAKE THE TIME TO READ THEM AND TO
TAKE RESPONSIBILITY FOR MY OBLIGATION TO PAY FOR SERVICES RENDERED.
 
I have read your news release and I realize that there are practitioners who find a way to abuse the
system.  And there will always be people ready to take advantage of legal loopholes and
opportunities for profit.   I point out to you that there have always been and always will be people
who take advantage of others – governments, businesses, and private citizens.   Your investigation
nor any proposed remedy will not stop those who want to profit off of others.
 
I also point out to you that there are far too many people who do not take the responsibility to
understand anything about their finances.  This applies to items other than medical bills.  Then when
they get into trouble they expect someone – usually the government – to bail them out. WE –
GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE RESPONSIBLE CITIZENS DO NOT OWE IT TO THEM TO BAIL THEM OUT
OF THEIR LAZINESS AND/OR STUPIDITY.
 
Your memorandum does consider the plight of medical services providers in collecting for their
services.  Yes, because they are medical service providers and not collection agents, using companies
like Care Credit relieves them of being collection agents while trying to provide medical services.  I’m
quite glad they do this.  I want them to focus on providing quality medical care!  I’ve been glad that
they had a way for me to use their services and not bankrupt myself!
 
Eliminating financing such as Care Credit does a disservice to consumers and providers who take
responsibility for their finances and use these cards properly.  WHAT OTHER FINANCING
ALTERNATIVES WILL YOU ALLOW?
 

You will not solve the problem of those who choose to not take responsibility and abuse the system. 
The government cannot make people be responsible nor legislate morals.  Eliminating a method of
financing medical care does NOT address the underlying problem of why medical care in this country
is so expensive.  THAT IS THE PROBLEM THAT YOU SHOULD BE ADDRESSING. 
 
Americans pay more than any other country in the world and our life expectancy in 2019, was at
No. 40 when compared to other countries, according to the World Health Organization.  World Data
ranks the U.S. at 42.
 
In conclusion, the medical financing system is not perfect, but it provides a reasonable alternative to
those of us seeking medical care.  Please do not be quick to eliminate it.  More education, more
transparency, and other financing alternatives (NOT USING TAXPAYER DOLLARS) – perhaps those are
what you should consider. 
 
Stephanie Palmer
25575 W Beth Dr
Buckeye, AZ  85326
Stephp361@aol.com
 
 
 
Sent from Mail for Windows
 
Virus-free.www.avast.com
