600 California Street, Floor 11
San Francisco, California 94108
September 11, 2023
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
1700 G Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20552
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services,
Department of Health and Human Services
P.O. Box 8010
Baltimore, MD 21244
U.S. Department of Treasury
1500 Pennsylvania Ave.
Washington, D.C. 20220
RE:
Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products
To whom it may concern:
PayZen is pleased to have the opportunity to respond to the Request for Information Regarding Medical
Payment Products (“RFI”) published by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (“CFPB”), Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid, Department of Health & Human Services (“HHS”), and Department of Treasury
(“Treasury”)(collectively the “Agencies”) on July 12, 2023. PayZen appreciates the Agencies’ focus on
this important area and encourages the Agencies to continue using their authority to promote the
development of patient-friendly solutions to the healthcare affordability crisis.
I.
Background on PayZen
PayZen was founded in 2019 with a simple yet critically important mission: to use technology to address
the healthcare affordability problem in a way that benefits both patients and healthcare providers. As the
RFI suggests, healthcare affordability is a significant problem in our country, with both the absolute cost of
healthcare and patients’ share of that cost rising faster than patients’ income or assets. Compounding
this problem, patients are often unaware of their out-of-pocket financial obligations, the options that might
exist to help them satisfy these obligations, or the risks presented by many of those options. On their
part, providers often face shrinking margins and reduced administrative support at a time of increasing
administrative burdens associated with administering financial assistance policies and collecting patient
balances.
1

We estimate that providers can collect approximately 25% of patient balances, with the amount of bad
debt increasing over time. Faced with the need to convert accounts receivable into revenue more
successfully, providers have increasingly turned to a suboptimal solution: consumer finance providers
willing to loan consumers the amount necessary to satisfy their out-of-pocket obligations. While these
credit products may satisfy providers’ short-term interest in collecting funds, they result in patients taking
on even more costly obligations to pay interest and fees — obligations they often do not fully understand
and which only worsen their overall financial health. In addition to the immediate impact on their wallet,
patients who finance their out-of-pocket obligations, in effect, convert their medical debt to general
consumer debt and, therefore, lose important consumer protections, including those protecting them from
negative credit reporting. The end result is bad for patients and, ultimately, providers, as patients are often
forced to defer necessary treatment and will associate the provider with their negative financial
experiences.
PayZen is seeking to use technology to solve this problem. First, PayZen’s solution integrates with
providers’ electronic health record systems and payment portals, which allows for full automation of the
process and facilitates patients’ understanding of their payment obligations and options, including the
potential availability of financial assistance. Second, PayZen utilizes unique datasets and a proprietary
AI-powered underwriting model to design a patient-specific payment plan that breaks patients’ financial
obligation into affordable monthly payments. Most significantly, and in contrast to many of the lenders in
this space, PayZen is able to offer this product to patients without interest or fees. By designing a
payment plan tailored to each patient’s circumstances, PayZen is able to offer providers the ability to
accelerate revenue in a patient-friendly manner that maximizes providers’ yield on their accounts
receivable while reducing providers’ administrative burdens. In effect, by automating processes and
utilizing sophisticated machine learning, PayZen is able to find the most affordable payment plan for each
patient—i.e., the result that optimizes outcomes for both parties to the underlying transaction while
eliminating the negative outcomes that neither party wants (additional interest and fees for the patient,
default, aggressive debt collection tactics, deferred care, etc.).
PayZen currently offers both post-care payment plans and a physical and virtual debit Care Card that can
be used to pay for existing balances or upcoming procedures. As with the post-care plan, Care Card
purchases are immediately split into affordable monthly payments with no interest or fees. In the future,
PayZen intends to offer products that further address challenges in the healthcare affordability segment,
including automation of Medicaid and financial assistance processes, as well as overall patient
affordability triage.
PayZen was founded on the idea that technology can be used to reduce complexity and friction in the
patient payment environment, benefitting both patients and providers. PayZen encourages the Agencies
to use their authorities to promote a marketplace where patients can obtain the care they need without
worrying about whether they will be able to afford it and where providers can focus their resources on
providing that care.
II.
Response to Specific Questions
PayZen offers the following responses to select questions posed by the RFI.
a.
General Questions
2

1.
What are the benefits, costs, and risks of medical payment products for consumers, health care
providers, and companies offering these products?
The benefits, costs, and risks of medical payment products will depend on the product at issue. For
example, consumers who take out high-interest loans to pay their out-of-pocket expenses will significantly
increase the amount they pay for their care. A default on the loan will lead to further negative
repercussions, including, potentially, aggressive debt collection and negative consumer reporting.
Unfortunately, medical debt is the #1 reason for personal bankruptcy. This system allows providers to get
paid for a transaction up-front, but the harm to their patients will ultimately damage their business as
patients are unable to afford subsequent care and may associate the provider with negative financial
outcomes. In the long run, only the provider of the credit product benefits.
PayZen’s product changes the calculus. Patients are able to swap their immediate obligation for an
interest-free payment plan with the provider that is specifically tailored to each patient’s circumstances.
PayZen’s payment options are often more flexible than what providers can offer in-house, and as a result,
more patients are able to access and pay for their care, and fewer patient accounts are placed with
collections agencies. At the same time, providers are able to increase the number of patients that receive
and pay for care, rather than end up in bad debt, without paying any fees for integration or ongoing
services. PayZen accelerates payment to providers while fully assuming the risk of patient default, freeing
up resources and capital for providers to invest in their core business of providing care.
2.
What are the terms of medical payment products, including interest rates and fees?
We note that Appendix A to CFPB’s report on Medical Credit Cards and Financing Plans issued on May
4, 2023 provides a useful summary of many of the medical payment products, including interest rates and
fees, available in the market in 2023.1 Likewise, the National Consumer Law Center published a report
entitled “Health Care Plastic, The Risks of Medical Credit Cards,” that studies one form of medical
payment product, with some additional information on such products.2
The PayZen payment plan allows patients to pay their out-of-pocket obligations over time (up to 60
months) through affordable monthly payments. It does not charge interest or fees.
4.
How concentrated is the medical payment product market, and what role do private equity firms
play in this market?
In our experience, the market for medical payment products is relatively fragmented. As a venture
capital-backed company, PayZen appreciates its investors’ commitment to helping bring to market an
innovative, patient-friendly medical payment product as part of an end-to-end solution focused on patient
affordability, with a focus on long-term outcomes that, if successful, will reward the investors while doing
right by patients and providers.
7.
Patients can pay for care in many different ways, such as by medical credit card or loan, general
purpose credit card, insurance, or through a zero-interest payment plan. What are the costs and
2 See https://www.nclc.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/Report_Health-Care-Plastic.pdf.
1 See https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_medical-credit-cards-and-financing-plans_2023-05.pdf.
3

benefits for health care providers of offering each of these methods? Are there situations in
which one method is more advantageous than another?
Generally speaking, providers whose customers pay their out-of-pocket obligations using a traditional
credit product receive full payment up front, but they may suffer long-term consequences associated with
poor outcomes for their patients’ personal finances. In our experience, providers of elective procedures
are more likely to require up-front payment, in full, which often entails patients’ reliance on a traditional
credit product. Non-elective providers generally receive a portion of their payment from insurance
providers and are therefore focused on the patient’s obligations post-insurance, such as deductibles,
co-payments, and costs of services not covered by insurance. These providers will often offer a no
interest payment plan, but these plans are not tailored to consumers’ individual circumstances and are
therefore unlikely to optimize yield to the same extent as PayZen’s product. Administration of these
products also entails considerable expense and burden, which PayZen assumes for providers.
8.
What incentives do financial services companies offer health care providers, including
revenue-sharing or other financial or non-financial incentives?
We cannot speak to what incentives others in the market offer providers, although we are aware that
some do provide various forms of incentives. However, PayZen does not offer financial incentives to
providers to induce them to do business with PayZen and believes that such financial incentives could
cause providers to recommend products to patients that are not in the patients’ best interests. Rather, we
focus on creating value for patients and providers. PayZen’s products and services allow providers to
accelerate revenue collection and avoid default risk in a manner that is patient friendly. PayZen’s
products and services also relieve providers of significant administrative burden and expense associated
with administering and collecting on payment plans on their own. Accordingly, PayZen encourages the
Agencies to closely scrutinize any incentive payments offered by other medical payment providers and
consider banning any such financial incentives or, at a minimum, requiring that they be clearly,
conspicuously and completely disclosed to patients.
12. To what extent are patients using medical payment products to pay bills that are incorrect, or that
could be covered or defrayed by lower-cost alternatives?
Patients who finance out-of-pocket medical obligations take on an obligation that is generally independent
of their original obligation to the provider. As a result, disputes with a bill, including the amount of
insurance coverage, can be more difficult to resolve. For example, the most frequent reasons for
incorrect billing that we observe are additional coverage/payments after the billing statement has been
sent, or delayed recognition that a patient qualifies for financial assistance. Moreover, to the extent that
such forms of credit become subject to credit reporting, that would compound the challenge of error
resolution.
PayZen’s integration with provider systems ensures that patients can dispute bills in the same way that
they would if their obligation remained with the provider. If the provider determines that a patient owes
less because of additional insurance payments or financial assistance, PayZen will reverse the
enrollment, refund any payments, and, if appropriate, provide a revised payment plan. PayZen is working
on a tool that will use its integration with providers’ systems to automatically determine eligibility for
financial assistance in advance of patients incurring expenses.
4

13. What actions should agencies consider taking to better understand the effects of medical
payment products on consumers and the health care industry, educate consumers and providers
about the risks of these products, and collect complaints?
We recommend that the Agencies review and set standards for: (1) clear and conspicuous disclosures of
all material terms, conditions, risks and benefits of a product during the enrollment process, taking into
account the unique factual context; (2) the integration of payment product providers’ systems with health
care providers’ systems in order to facilitate consumer understanding and the resolution of billing
disputes; and (3) clear disclosure of payment product providers’ collection practices, including consumer
reporting, and adherence to all standards applicable to medical debt.
b.
CFPB-Specific Questions
4.
Do consumers understand the risks of paying medical bills via a medical credit card, installment
loan, or other commercial payment product, including lowered ability to negotiate the bill with their
provider?
Too often, patients do not understand the basic terms of traditional credit products that are offered by
providers to cover patients’ out-of-pocket obligations, including the significant interest and fees that could
accompany those products. Patients also may not understand the secondary risks that come with such
products, including the impact of the product on patients’ consumer credit profile and the risks of
aggressive debt collection practices.
PayZen encourages the Agencies to mandate clear disclosures to consumers of their obligations when
using a traditional credit product, including the impact of fees and interest payments that accompany such
products. The PayZen payment plans utilized by providers do not charge consumers interest or fees and
allow consumers to satisfy their obligations through fixed monthly payments. PayZen also encourages
the Agencies to educate patients on the options that might be available to make healthcare more
affordable, including financial assistance or zero interest payment plans, like those offered by the
providers that PayZen supports.
5.
To what extent are alleged debts placed on medical credit cards and loans sent to debt
collectors? How do medical payment product companies’ debt collection practices differ from
those of health care providers, and are any issuer or provider debt collection practices posing
risks to consumers?
PayZen does not contract with third-party debt collectors or engage in aggressive debt collection
practices. If a patient experiences a hardship that affects their ability to make their monthly payment, they
are encouraged to contact PayZen’s customer support team to review available options, including a
revised payment plan.
6.
How can the CFPB use its authorities to ensure people with medical bills in collections, including
medical payment product debt, are screened for eligibility for financial assistance and other
benefits?
5

The CFPB has broad authority to ensure that patients fully understand the “costs, benefits, and risks
associated with [consumer financial products or services], in light of the facts and circumstances.”3
Because the availability of financial assistance will necessarily impact the amount of any additional debt,
the CFPB can mandate disclosure of whether financial assistance is available and the amount of any
such financial assistance.
c.
HHS-Specific Questions
7.
How might HHS improve patient understanding of options for covering the cost of medical
treatments? At what points in the care process could patients be provided with information about
their financial obligations and payment options?
Patients should be provided with information about their financial obligations and payment options before
treatment, unless providing such information in advance of treatment is impossible. Such information
should include eligibility for financial assistance, as well as the availability of different payment options,
including interest-free options. Patients should receive this information sufficiently far in advance of any
decision on treatment to allow them to make an informed judgment regarding their treatment and its
impacts on their finances.
d.
Treasury-Specific Questions
8.
Does the availability of medical payment products generally benefit the community or assist
patients financially?
It depends. As patient payment responsibility increases, achieving equitable access to healthcare will
depend on the availability of patient-friendly payment products, such as no-interest payment plans, and
well-informed patients who are aware of the benefits, costs, and risks of all available payment options,
including financial assistance, prior making important decisions about medical care and treatments.
PayZen is committed to advancing equitable access to healthcare and is demonstrating that
patient-friendly payment options are both available and economically feasible. By contrast, payment
products that charge interest and fees leave consumers worse off and do not benefit the community or
assist patients financially.
III.
Conclusion
PayZen appreciates the Agencies’ focus on these important issues and encourages the Agencies to use
their respective authorities to address the healthcare affordability crisis. Should the Agencies have further
questions they may contact me at itzik@payzen.com.
Sincerely,
Itzik Cohen
Co-Founder and CEO, PayZen
3 12 U.S.C. § 5532(a).
6
