 
 
September 11, 2023 
Comment Intake 
Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
1700 G Street NW 
Washington, DC 20552 
 
Re:  
Request for Information Regarding Medical Payments Products; Consumer 
Financial Protection Bureau, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department 
of Health and Human Services, and Department of the Treasury (88 Fed. Reg. 44,281-
44,290, July 12, 2023) 
To Whom It May Concern: 
The Center for Capital Markets Competitiveness (“CCMC”) appreciates the 
opportunity to submit comments regarding the Request for Information regarding 
medical payment products (the “RFI”).1 
Medical care providers play an important role in Americans’ lives, allowing them 
to live longer and better than ever before. Congress and relevant regulators have taken 
numerous policy actions to make this medical care more accessible and affordable. 
These actions include the creation of Medicaid and Medicare, the establishment of 
health insurance exchanges, and establishing protections for Americans when they 
seek care in an emergency room.  
Practically speaking, financial services companies play an important role for 
Americans seeking healthcare, since they provide payment options to consumers 
making use of medical care when it is not paid for by insurance. However, we note as 
a threshold matter that there are significant limitations on the scope of payment 
providers’ role in the context of medical care. These limitations also result in a 
corresponding limitation in the authority of the CFPB and inform the scope of our 
comments today in two primary ways. 
First, payments products do not have a role in the underlying transactions that 
give rise to an obligation to pay a medical provider. Given the structure of medical 
billing practices, Americans frequently use various payment cards, checks, or other 
payments products to satisfy whatever obligation they have incurred. The role of 
 
1 See Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products, CFPB-2023-0038, 88 Fed. Reg. 
44281 (July 12, 2023).  

 
2 
 
payments products in the medical sector is not unique. As in other sectors, consumer 
financial services providers have no role in the underlying transaction that gives rise to 
an obligation. Rather, they simply allow a consumer to pay for an incurred financial 
obligation once incurred. Here, this means that consumer financial services providers 
do not have a role in the sale or delivery of medical services, the medical insurance 
market, or the medical billing system. As the RFI acknowledges, these matters are 
likewise outside the authority of the CFPB. We consequently do not focus on those 
activities in our comments today. 
Second, we also note that there are a range of specialized financial products 
that receive special treatment under the tax code and that play an important role in 
paying for medical care. Such financial products include Health Savings Accounts and 
Flexible Spending Accounts. These important products are also outside the CFPB’s 
authority, however. We accordingly do not address such products in these comments. 
Given these limitations, we focus our comments on issues within the authority 
of the CFPB: use of payments products offered by financial services companies 
without preferred tax treatment in the medical services context. While obligations vary 
widely based on insurance coverage and other factors, individual patients often have 
financial responsibility for a portion of the cost of medical care. A variety of payment 
products make it easier for Americans to cover these expenses. These general 
payment products (such as credit cards, debit cards, etc.) are subject to numerous 
regulatory requirements, including transparent disclosures and responsible 
underwriting. Consumers are likewise entitled to—and already receive—appropriate 
protections when such debts enter the collections process, including from errors or 
inappropriate conduct in debt collection, just like they do in other contexts.  
The CFPB should not attempt to impose discrete regulations on “medical 
payments” since, from a financial services perspective, there are no distinctive 
payments features that would merit such specialized treatment. This is because it 
could very well result in unintended consequences, reducing Americans’ access to 
payment and credit products and making it more difficult for Americans to pay for the 
care they need. Making it more difficult for creditors to collect on debt to which they 
are contractually entitled would likewise increase the cost of medical care. (Debt 
collection activities support the existing payment system by allowing recovery on 
these obligations—thereby keeping borrowing costs low and encouraging lenders to 
continue to offer popular products.) Similarly, making it harder for creditors, and other 
companies, to rely on the information provided to credit bureaus would make it more 
challenging to assess a borrower’s ability to repay a loan, leading to a higher cost of 
credit for consumers and reduced access to credit. 

 
3 
 
We accordingly would ask the CFPB to consider three key points as it evaluates 
the information it receives in response to this RFI. 
• The CFPB should not try to use payment regulations to address 
perceived concerns with medical billing and business practices.  
• Any policy actions based on the distinctive treatment of medical debt 
would be misplaced.  
• The CFPB should not discourage the use of any particular payment 
product. 
I. 
The CFPB should not try to use payment regulations to address perceived 
concerns with medical billing and business practices.  
The RFI identifies several perceived concerns with the way that medical 
services are provided and billed. These concerns do not relate to how Americans 
choose to pay for these products and services, however. Rather, they relate to 
dynamics in the underlying transaction between a patient and a medical provider 
and/or insurance company—matters that, as noted above, are outside the CFPB’s 
statutory authority. In short, the CFPB is not a healthcare regulator. It has neither the 
knowledge nor the appropriate tools to address issues it perceives in how patients 
interact with their doctors or their insurance companies. The CFPB should not use its 
authority over payments products to address any such matters.  
We certainly acknowledge that payments products are regularly used by 
Americans to pay for medical products and services. Products with medical benefits 
are a constant presence in our lives. Whether putting on a bandage, taking a pain 
reliever, using sunscreen, measuring your child’s temperature, putting on contacts, or 
wearing a hearing aid, an American consumer may use a handful of different products 
with medical benefits before breakfast. Many Americans purchase such products with 
general purpose credit cards, much like they use such cards to pay for a co-pay for a 
doctor’s visit.  
There is nothing distinctive, however, about the use of a payment product in 
this manner. From a payments perspective, this is just another transaction on a credit 
card. The payment is not treated differently from the purchase of other products, 
including non-medical products that may be purchased in the same transaction. As a 
result, there is no appropriate policy basis for treating the use of a payment card to 
pay for medical products or services differently than payments for other products. 
The CFPB consequently should not attempt to address medical billing or 
business practices through special regulation of “medical payments products.” The 

 
4 
 
CFPB has not—and cannot—define this term in a way that would limit it to a 
distinctive set of payments products that merit distinctive regulation. Neither 
Congress nor other regulatory agencies have defined this term in the past, and the 
CFPB offers only ambiguous and conflicting definitions of the term here.  
To that end, the RFI appears to view the term as covering “medical credit cards” 
and “installment loans” that are “limited to” paying for “medical procedures, items, or 
services at participating medical service providers, including primary and specialty 
care, labs and diagnostics, inpatient and outpatient services, dental, vision, and 
pharmacy care.”2 But, to our knowledge, there are no such products that meet the 
CFPB’s own definition since the cited products can be used to pay for products 
unrelated to healthcare. Other than certain payment products associated with Flexible 
Spending Accounts and Health Savings Accounts, which are not addressed in this 
letter, we are aware of no credit cards that are exclusively used as a “medical 
payments product” (if this is what the Bureau is suggesting)—i.e., permitting use only 
for medical products or services. Rather, these products typically allow for consumers 
to purchase non-medical services—in the same way that a card marketed at 
consumers to buy flights or make transactions at a particular retailer can be used for 
other purposes. Indeed, the CFPB itself acknowledges that one of the examples it 
cites allows for payment for “veterinary services.”3 
II. 
Any policy actions based on the distinctive treatment of medical debt would 
be misplaced.  
The CFPB appears to be contemplating policy actions that would attempt to 
address concerns it has identified with medical debt. Indeed, the RFI repeatedly 
mentions apparent concerns with the overall medical debt burden. The RFI suggests, 
for example, that the federal government is already working to “reduce the burden of 
medical debt.”4 Likewise, the RFI refers to the CFPB’s own report, produced in March 
2022, on “Medical debt burden in the United States.”5 Similarly, the RFI cites to the 
White House’s April 11, 2022 Fact Sheet pointing to concerns with overall medical debt 
in the United States.6 But payments and debt collection policy is not the right tool to 
address the cost of medical care. We would urge the CFPB not to attempt to use its 
authority to address issues that are outside its purview.  
 
2 88 Fed Reg at 44283. 
3 88 Fed. Reg. at 44283 n.18. 
4 88 Fed. Reg. at 44281 (characterizing the RFI as “[i]n line with the agencies’ work to lower health care 
costs and reduce the burden of medical debt…”). 
5 Id. at 44282 n.9. 
6 Id. at 44282 n.8. 

 
5 
 
As a general matter, different types of debt should not be subject to different 
regulatory frameworks. Whether a debt was incurred in a doctor’s office or a grocery 
store does not change the importance of repayment of debt or change the appropriate 
policy approach to such debt. Moreover, imposing different regulatory frameworks 
would be impossible to administer.7 Practically speaking, payments processors do not 
code payments to medical providers as “medical payments,” nor do they include 
information about such “medical payments” in information provided to debt collectors. 
As a result, debt collectors are not able to treat certain debts as “medical debts.” This 
means that any rule imposing special requirements on the collection of “medical 
debts” would result in confusion and/or require massive—and unjustified—reworkings 
of existing payments and debt collection practices. Consider, for example, the 
collection of a debt on a credit card that was used to purchase medical services, 
among many other things. It would be virtually impossible for a debt collector to know 
whether, and to what extent, a charged off balance on that card constituted a 
“medical debt.” Similarly, a debt collector could not know whether a borrower had 
used a “medical credit card” to purchase medical or veterinary services. Only a 
significant reworking of existing approaches could make this possible. But this would 
not make them appropriate.  
The CFPB must not disrupt the debt collection marketplace by introducing 
unjustified and impractical distinctions. The regulation of debt collectors should not 
vary based on how such debt is recognized. Any other approach that restricts 
collection of medical debt would likely increase the cost of credit and reduce the 
availability of payments products that consumers want.  
Relatedly, the CFPB also should not make credit reporting less reliable by 
limiting the reporting of medical debts. The Chamber strongly cautions against the 
banning of reporting any information related to medical debt (or otherwise) to credit 
bureaus. Making more information available strengthens the risk-based pricing 
system that has been historically proven to expand access to credit.8 This information 
enables creditors, such as banks and credit unions, to understand a borrower’s ability 
to repay a loan. Not only does this information protect the safety and soundness of 
the financial institution depending on a credit report, but it plays a critical consumer 
protection function since it helps institutions avoid extending credit to borrowers who 
 
7 The three nationwide credit reporting companies recently removed all paid medical debt from 
consumer credit reports and the time period before unpaid medical collection debt will appear on a 
consumers’ credit report was increased from six months to one year. These measures are designed to 
address specific circumstances, rather than all credit reporting relating to medical debt. 
8 US Chamber, Supporting and Strengthening Risk-Based Pricing to Benefit All U.S. Consumers (April 
15, 2021), https://www.uschamber.com/finance/supporting-and-strengthening-risk-based-pricing-
benefit-all-us-consumers  

 
6 
 
are more likely to default. Any action by the CFPB to restrict the reporting of medical 
debts (or any other class of debt) would have significant unintended negative 
consequences. 
III. 
The CFPB should not discourage the use of any particular payments 
product.  
Consumers choose to use a wide range of payments products to make 
payments to medical (and other) providers. While not every consumer will need or 
benefit from each particular payment product, many rely upon them to gain access to 
the care they need. These responsible payment products are designed to succeed: no 
financial institution benefits from consumer default. These responsible products are 
also already heavily regulated, with clear disclosures and sound underwriting 
practices required by existing law. Current laws covering credit require extensive 
disclosures; In particular, Truth in Lending Act disclosures that show the cost of credit 
must be provided to the consumer. This information can be used by the customer to 
compare financing options. Lenders also perform credit underwriting for new 
accounts, which includes an analysis of the borrower’s ability to repay. The CFPB 
consequently should not treat these responsible credit products as inherently risky or 
problematic, and should not discourage their use by informed consumers.  
The CFPB should not discourage the use of any payment product that is offered 
in compliance with existing law. To that end, we are concerned that the CFPB provides 
unjustified criticism of deferred interest in connection with “medical payment 
products.” To this end, the RFI notes that “[m]any medical payment products offer 
complex deferred interest promotions, which consumers often do not understand 
fully, and which can significantly increase the cost of their care if they do not pay in 
full during the promotional period.” Deferred interest is offered in payment products 
throughout the economy, oftentimes via credit cards, and is not exclusive to “medical 
payment products.” And despite the misplaced criticism in this RFI, the CFPB’s 2021 
CARD Act report finds that promotions by private label and retail co-brand cards to 
use deferred interest as an option to finance larger purchases “remain generally 
popular with consumers, with purchase volumes relatively high despite pandemic-era 
disruptions in retail sales.”9 The CFPB should not impose distinctive negative 
treatment on this broadly popular and well-regulated product feature. 
 
 
9 CFPB, The Consumer Credit Card Market 93 (2021), 
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_consumer-credit-card-market-report_2021.pdf 

 
7 
 
* * * * * 
 
We thank you for your consideration of these comments and would be happy to 
discuss these issues further. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Bill Hulse 
Senior Vice President  
Center for Capital Markets Competitiveness 
U.S. Chamber of Commerce 
