 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 11, 2023 
 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau  
1700 G Street NW 
Docket No. CFPB-2023-0038 
Washington, DC 20552 
 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services  
Department of Health and Human Services  
Docket No. CMS–2023–0106  
Baltimore, MD 21244–8010 
 
Department of the Treasury 
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Docket No. TREAS-DO-2023-0008 
Washington, DC 20220 
 
Re: Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products 
 
To Whom it May Concern: 
 
The Academy of Doctors of Audiology (ADA) appreciates the opportunity to provide input on the Request 
for Information (RFI) by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services (CMS), and Department of the Treasury (Treasury). ADA and its members are dedicated 
to advancing evidence-based clinical and business practices in the delivery of hearing and balance 
healthcare. Audio-vestibular health is essential to overall health—and non-treatment and delays in 
audiologic treatment are associated with substantial increased health risks.1,2  
 
Despite the importance of audiology services and associated treatments such as hearing aids and other 
medical devices to overall health and quality of life, insurance coverage for hearing and balance 
healthcare is inconsistent, and often limited, especially for adult consumers/beneficiaries. Medicare Part B 
does not cover hearing aids, and while many commercial insurance plans, including Medicare Part C plans, 
offer some type of hearing aid benefit, these benefits are often in the form or a hearing aid discount 
rather than true medical coverage.  
 
Fifteen percent of American adults aged 18 years of age and older report having trouble hearing. 
However, fewer than 25% of adults who could benefit from a hearing aid use one.3,4 One of the biggest 
barriers to hearing aid adoption is out-of-pocket cost. The average cost of a pair of hearing aids is $4,6725. 
 
1 Lin FR, Ferrucci L. Hearing Loss and Falls Among Older Adults in the United States. Archives of internal medicine. 
2012;172(4):369-371. doi:10.1001/archinternmed.2011.728. 
2 Gill Livingston, Jonathan Huntley, Andrew Sommerlad, et al. Dementia prevention, intervention, and care: 2020 report of the Lancet Commission. 
The Lancet. Elsevier. 2020. 
3 https://www.nidcd.nih.gov/health/statistics/quick-statistics-hearing 
4 https://health.gov/healthypeople/objectives-and-data/browse-objectives/sensory-or-communication-disorders/increase-proportion-adults-
hearing-loss-who-use-hearing-aid-hoscd-07/data-methodology 
5 https://www.hearingtracker.com/how-much-do-hearing-aids-cost  

 
 
 
Audiology clinics are generally obligated to pay their suppliers within 60 days of receiving and dispensing 
hearing aids to patients. As a result of high wholesale costs for hearing aids, and often slow 
reimbursement by commercial and government payers, independent audiology clinics operate on tight 
margins. They lack both the financial resources and the expertise to be able to extend credit to 
consumers. At the same time, most audiology patients do not have funds to cover the full cost or their 
out-of-pocket costs for audiology services and hearing devices.  
 
Third-party financing solutions, such as CareCredit, provide an important option for patients to bridge the 
gap and help ensure that important, medically necessary treatment is not delayed or denied due to a 
patient’s inability to pay in full up front for treatment.  Patients appreciate having the option to access a 
line of credit that is specifically designed to address healthcare costs, and that offers interest-free loans as 
long as payment is made in full within a designated time period (usually 12 months).  
 
Audiology clinics typically accept traditional credit cards, and other forms of payment in addition to 
healthcare credit cards. Further, audiologists have no financial incentive to steer patients towards 
healthcare credit cards. In fact, the merchant fees charged to audiology clinics by healthcare credit card 
companies, such as CareCredit, are typically higher than merchant fees charged by traditional credit card 
companies. Most audiologists agree, however, that it is worth the additional expense to be able to offer 
alternative healthcare credit solutions that meet the unique financing needs of their patients. Audiologists 
also report that patients who choose to fund audiology treatment through healthcare credit cards receive 
clear, transparent, timely information about the financing terms and requirements.  
 
Audiologists are committed to the wellbeing of their patients. ADA and its members relentlessly advocate 
for improved access to audiologists and improved coverage of audiology treatment services, hearing 
amplification, and other treatments for hearing and balance disorders. ADA encourages the CFPB, CMS, 
and Treasury to investigate opportunities to improve competition, and coverage to lower the cost of 
hearing devices to consumers (and thus lower the amount of medical debt that they must undertake). In 
the meantime, the Agencies should ensure continued consumer access to important healthcare financing 
solutions such as CareCredit, which play a critical role in timely access to audiologic care for millions of 
American consumers. 
 
Please contact me at sczuhajewski@audiologist.org anytime if you have any questions, or if I can assist 
you in any way. Thank you again for the opportunity to provide input on medical payment products. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Stephanie Czuhajewski, MPH, CAE 
Executive Director 
 
 
 
