 
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thomas D. Policelli 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CEO, HPS/PayMedix 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1000 North Water Street, 11th floor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Milwaukee, WI  53202 
 
September 10, 2023 
 
 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
 
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
1700 G Street, NW 
 
 
 
 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Washington, DC  20552 
 
 
 
PO Box 8010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baltimore, MD  21244-8010 
 
United States Department of Treasury 
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20220 
 
Submitted via www.regulations.gov 
 
Docket Numbers:   
CFPB-2023-0038 
 
 
 
CMS-2023-0106 
 
 
 
TREAS-DO-2323-0008 
 
To whom it may concern: 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide input to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
(CFPB), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and U.S. Department of Treasury (the 
“Agencies”) regarding medical payment products (Request for Information published in the 
Federal Register dated July 12, 2023).  
 
The Agencies should be lauded for their examination of the way in which medical payment 
products are being utilized beyond their original purpose for assisting with costs generated from 
out-of-network and elective care. (The RFI defines “medical payment products” as those “being 
administered by financial services companies, who manage the billing and collections process 
for these products and earn revenue through interest and fees”.) 
 
The expanded use of medical payment products imposes an even greater financial burden on 
many patients, limits their creditworthiness, and raises overall healthcare costs. The Agencies 
should ensure full transparency for all medical credit cards, installment loans, and other medical 
payment products that carry interest charges and consumer fees and can cause significant 
increases in cost of care. Further, the Agencies should ensure that consumers have clear 

 
 
 
 
2
information regarding charity care eligibility and preserve their ability to negotiate bills and 
secure adjustments.  
 
We have a crisis of healthcare affordability in the U.S., which is a bigger topic and which a 
myriad of public policy and private market solutions have attempted to address. In the 
meantime, it is necessary for patients to pay for their rapidly rising portion of healthcare costs, 
especially in-network allowed charges such as deductibles and co-pays. The good news is that 
new products have entered the market and created a stronger and more equitable outcome for 
consumers. Innovative private companies such as PayMedix offer consumer-friendly alternatives 
which simplify the medical billing experience, treat all patients equitably and with dignity, and 
eliminate additional costs for patients and family members. 
 
Contents 
 
1. 
Background ............................................................................................................................. 2 
2. 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service ........................................ 5 
a) Reducing Employee Financial Stress ................................................................................ 6 
b) Health Equity .................................................................................................................... 7 
c) Patient Benefits I: Simplified Billing Process .................................................................... 8 
d) Patient Benefits II: Reduced Cost and Risk ...................................................................... 9 
e) Provider Benefits I: No Promotional Role ........................................................................ 9 
f) Provider Benefits II: Reduced Administrative Burden.................................................... 10 
g) Charity Care .................................................................................................................... 11 
h) Disputed Medical Bills .................................................................................................... 11 
i) Consumer Protections.................................................................................................... 11 
3. 
Response to RFI Questions.................................................................................................... 12 
a) General Questions .......................................................................................................... 19 
b) CFPB-Specific Questions................................................................................................. 32 
c) HHS-Specific Questions .................................................................................................. 36 
d) Treasury-Specific Questions ........................................................................................... 41 
4. 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................. 44 
 
1. Background 
 
U.S. healthcare expenditures, as measured by the annual National Health Expenditure data 
published by CMS, totaled $4.3 trillion in 2021. This represents 18% of U.S. GDP, up from 13% in 

 
 
 
 
3
2000, 9% in 1980 and 5% in 1960.1 While the portion of total U.S. healthcare costs not covered 
by insurance and therefore paid “out of pocket” by patients declined on average from 47% in 
1960 to 10% in 2021, the total dollars owed by patients has grown 5.9% annually over the same 
period, which is nearly twice the rate of U.S economic growth. In 2021, the NHE data shows out 
of pocket spending grew 10.4% to $433.2 billion. 
 
The crisis of healthcare affordability is well documented, and all stakeholders have had to adapt. 
Employers have increasingly shifted rising costs to employees through High Deductible Health 
Plans (HDHPs), higher co-pays and higher monthly premiums. Healthcare providers have 
tightened up claims processing over the years, and as the amounts due from consumers 
continues to rise, they have introduced easier ways for patients to pay (online portals, card on 
file, text-to-pay) and extended payment terms. Unfortunately, the financing options 
implemented by providers at times have hurt consumers’ ability to negotiate bills and amounts 
due, reduced their access to financial assistance/ charity care, and brought in unfavorable 
financing terms (interest charges and fees) that are not transparent to patients. This has further 
reduced access to care. 
 
In 2022, four in ten adults (43%) said that they or a household member put off or postponed 
needed health care due to cost.2 When they do receive care, patients are stressed by paying the 
bill. In a recent study, over one-half of Americans said that in the last six months paying for 
medical bills has been stressful (52%) and that stress has had some impact on their physical or 
mental health (92%).3 
 
Another recent report indicated how widespread the problem has become, with 23.5% of 
middle-class people (nearly 17 million) having medical debt in 2020, which was more than the 
22% of lower-income population.4 Making matters worse, healthcare providers may offer so-
called “in-house payment plans” to patients to pay off their hospital charges over time, and 
then turn around and deny care to patients who have unpaid balances outstanding.5 
 
It is also important to make sure consumers understand their medical bills, and can dispute 
hospital, physician, and other charges when they believe they are incorrect. In one recent study, 
59% of providers rated patient financial literacy as “poor” despite their own investments in 
patient educational materials and financial counselors. 6 A separate study found that 56% of 
 
1 NHE website and “NHE Fact Sheet” (2021 data), available at https://www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-
systems/statistics-trends-and-reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/nhe-fact-sheet.  
2 Peterson-KFF Health System Tracker, “How does cost affect access to healthcare?” (Jan. 2023), available at 
https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/chart-collection/cost-affect-access-care/.  
3 PayMedix, “Healthcare Payments and Financial Disparities Study” (Jun. 2023), available at 
https://paymedix.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/PayMedix-National-Survey-Key-Finding-Final.pdf.  
4 Third Way, “Medical Debt Hits the Heart of the Middle Class” (Aug. 2023), available at 
https://www.thirdway.org/report/medical-debt-hits-the-heart-of-the-middle-class.  
5 New York Times, “This Nonprofit Health System Cuts Off Patients With Medical Debt” (Jun. 2023), available at 
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/01/business/allina-health-hospital-debt.html.  
6 “Study Finds Healthcare Providers Looking to Outsource Revenue Cycle Management Processes” (Apr. 2023), 
available at https://www.carecredit.com/pressrelease/cwh-advisors-patientpay-research/.  

 
 
 
 
4
Americans feel “completely lost” when it comes to understanding their health plans.7 In one 
consumer survey, 38% of patients said their medical bills were somewhat confusing or 
extremely confusing.8 Any solutions to help patients afford healthcare should include help to 
improve patients’ abilities to understand what they owe and advocate for themselves on the 
financial side of healthcare. 
 
This is especially important because medical billing errors occur frequently – half of 
respondents to a recent study reported incorrect charges of at least $200, and a quarter saw a 
difference of more than $500 on their bills.9 When patients use medical payment products, 
including credit cards and installment loans that convert medical debt to consumer debt, they 
often lose the ability to go back and ask for adjustments to incorrectly billed amounts. In fact, 
once a billed amount moves over to a medical payment product, some interpretations hold that 
this represents a consumer's commitment that the charge was justified.10 Effectively once an 
incorrect billed amount is paid on a medical credit card or installment product, some of those 
payment products require the patient to ultimately pay that incorrect amount, even if the 
patient was erroneously overbilled. 
 
There are programs available to help lower-income patients pay their medical bills, including 
each non-profit hospital’s own financial assistance policies and enrollment in state Medicaid 
plans. However, healthcare providers often do a poor job making patients aware of these 
options, and they continue to send bills to patients who could potentially qualify for assistance. 
One study demonstrated that almost half of non-profit hospitals sent medical bills to patients 
whose incomes are low enough to qualify for charity care, accounting for $2.7 billion in medical 
expenses which would have been written off according to the hospital’s own policies if the 
patients had applied for assistance.11  
 
Historically, consumer healthcare costs in the commercial market (i.e., those not in a 
government health care program) have been dealt with in two ways: 
 
 
 
 
7 “More than Half of Americans Confused by Health Insurance, Including HSAs” (Feb. 2021), available at 
https://www.bendhsa.com/newsroom/more-than-half-of-americans-confused-by-health-insurance-including-hsas.  
8 “Nearly 40% of Americans Confused by Medical Bills” (Dec. 2022), available at https://akasa.com/press/nearly-
40-of-americans-confused-by-medical-bills/.  
9 “New Research Reveals Consumer Frustrations with Healthcare Billing and Lack of Processes for Correcting Errors” 
(Jan. 2023), available at https://www.zelis.com/news/new-research-reveals-consumer-frustrations-with-
healthcare-billing/.  
10 NPR, “Doctors And Hospitals Tell Patients: Show Us The Money Before Treatment” (Dec. 2016), available at 
https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2016/12/07/504589131/doctors-and-hospitals-tell-patients-show-us-
the-money-before-treatment.  
11 KFF Health News, “Patients Eligible For Charity Care Instead Get Big Bills” (Oct. 2019), available at 
https://kffhealthnews.org/news/patients-eligible-for-charity-care-instead-get-big-bills/. 

 
 
 
 
5
1. In-network allowed charges.  These are the copays, deductibles, and out-of-pocket 
amounts for which consumers are responsible under their employer-provided health 
coverage and which received the best-negotiated price with healthcare providers 
o A combination of the provider, insurer, and employer could offer financial 
assistance to consumers to pay their portion (e.g., payment plans, HRAs/ FSAs/ 
HSAs, health/ wellness incentive accounts, etc.) 
o Assistance was both guaranteed and universal for all consumers regardless their 
individual financial status 
o Consumers have a financial incentive to seek out cost-effective care 
 
2. Out-of-network and elective care.  This is care that consumers choose to consume even 
though it will cost them more money and/or is not a covered medical benefit (e.g., 
cosmetic surgery) 
o If financed, the consumer could individually seek a credit product, or the 
healthcare provider could partner with a financial services firm to offer that 
function 
o Consumers are individually underwritten, and whether credit is offered and if so 
on what terms varies significantly 
o Consumer interest and fees are typically a key component of these products 
 
Medical payment products as defined in the RFI were traditionally sold for use in the out-of-
network and elective care, and they filled a role in that arena.  More recently, though, these 
medical payment products are being utilized to finance in-network allowed costs after 
insurance.   
 
Many, including PayMedix, view this expansion of medical payment products as problematic.  
Any product for in-network allowed charges that does not apply to all individuals (regardless 
of their creditworthiness) and provide full coverage up to a patient’s out-of-pocket maximum 
is cherry-picking consumers with higher credit ratings.  This approach diminishes universal 
access to care, increases health inequity, and drives up overall healthcare costs.  A better 
approach for assisting consumers with their in-network allowed charges is a “Guaranteed 
Universal Billing and Payment Service.”  We define and explain this term in Section 2.   
 
2. The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service 
 
An alternative model exists that does not place additional financial burden on patients, 
preserves their creditworthiness, and treats all patients equitably and with dignity. This 
Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service is being utilized by a growing number of 

 
 
 
 
6
patients and is addressing the payment challenges faced by patients covered by health plans – 
since 58% of provider bad debt is from patients with health insurance, a 5x increase in 3 years.12 
 
In this model, employers contract with a third party to reimburse healthcare providers for the 
out-of-pocket portion of the in-network medical bill owed by their employees. The third-party, 
for example PayMedix, is then responsible for collecting the out-of-pocket amount owed from 
the patient, who receives the PayMedix SuperEOB combining all billing and EOB information 
from healthcare providers they visit in one consolidated monthly statement.13 Patients see 
immediately what they owe, how to pay it, and how to get credit if they need it in the form of 
extended payment options. The provider is not involved in collecting balances due from these 
patients. 
 
Guaranteed.  Payment is guaranteed to the providers on behalf of all consumers. 
 
Universal.  All employees and their dependents are automatically included, and all in-network 
costs up to the full out-of-pocket maximum can be included.  No one is excluded for any reason. 
 
Billing.  All of the consumer’s medical bills and EOBs are reconciled automatically and are 
replaced by a simple monthly summary statement. 
 
Payment.  Consumers can pay one bill that covers all of the participating providers, and if they 
need to pay over time then they can automatically get a no-fee, 0% interest payment plan. 
 
Service.  Since PayMedix is funded by employers and providers, it is provided at no cost to the 
consumer. 
 
a) Reducing Employee Financial Stress 
 
Employers can play a large role in helping employees reduce the stress of healthcare billing. 60% 
of employees say their employers are responsible for providing financial strategies to help them 
manage expenses, while 72% of corporate benefits managers are interested in a simplified 
medical payments solution, especially payment options that are flexible and offer 0% or low 
interest. 14 Since the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service guarantees 0% 
interest credit for all patients and has no consumer fees, it is an excellent fit for both benefits 
managers and employees. 
 
 
12 “Hospital collection rates for self-pay patient accounts” (Aug. 2022), available at https://www.crowe.com/-
/media/crowe/llp/widen-media-files-folder/h/hospital-collection-rates-for-self-pay-patient-accounts-report-
chc2305-001a.pdf.  
13 Employees are able to use the PayMedix simplified billing service for medical claims generated with healthcare 
providers who are in-network for their health plan, and also in the PayMedix network.  
14 PayMedix, “Healthcare Payments and Financial Disparities Study” (Jun. 2023), available at 
https://paymedix.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/PayMedix-National-Survey-Key-Finding-Final.pdf.  

 
 
 
 
7
Employers offer the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service to their 
employees to supplement their commercial group health benefit plan, and provide a benefit to 
employees who have moved to a High Deductible Health Plans (HDHPs). Patients with a HDHP 
incur higher out of pocket medical expenses until they meet their annual deductible. Unlike 
medical payment products that are offered to some patients after they receive care, all patients 
enrolled in PayMedix know before they receive care that they have the flexibility and benefits of 
the PayMedix service. This certainty removes a stubborn and persistent source of a barrier to 
care and allows the patient to proceed with needed medical services. 
 
The characteristics and demographics of participating employees in the PayMedix billing service 
are representative of the full cross section of the employer’s workforce. The billing solution is 
the same for the CEO of the firm as it is for an entry level hire. The PayMedix billing service is 
uniform across the participating workforce of each client. This includes core service features 
such as the configuration of the consolidated bill (“SuperEOB”), and the flexibility of the 
employee to choose the most appropriate bill repayment plan based on their individual 
financial situation.  
 
Since participants know they will be provided care without providers checking to see if they can 
afford it or have outstanding medical debt, PayMedix improves access to care.  The United 
States has seen a recent spike in later-stage disease because consumers were unable or 
unwilling to receive regular care during COVID; people now show up with Stage 4 cancer instead 
of getting caught earlier.  This dynamic has always been the case for those with concerns about 
how they would be able to pay their portion of in-network allowed charges.  PayMedix removes 
that concern – its employer clients have seen annual medical trend in the 2.5-3.4% range for 
years, or about half the market norm.  When people know they can access care, they get more 
care when they need it.  This saves the healthcare system overall as well as improves the health 
status of the individual patients.    
 
b) Health Equity 
 
It is estimated the 43% of Americans avoid seeking care when they need it15 cut back on 
medications to treat chronic conditions like diabetes or fail to follow through on important 
imaging and other tests that can save lives. They do this because they don’t have the means to 
pay for care.  
 
An important feature of the PayMedix model is that unlike medical credit cards and installment 
loans targeted for post-service medical expenses, PayMedix does not require each patient to 
apply or be approved to qualify for the service. There is no review of employee credit history 
during enrollment, and no looking at other data sources that would be used to risk score 
patients and then adjust pricing and other terms at the individual level. Thus, PayMedix does 
not ‘cherry pick’ low-risk patients or seduce high-risk patients with gimmicky teaser rates. When 
an employer selects PayMedix as a benefit, all its employees are offered credit up to their 
 
15 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
8
annual in-network out of pocket maximum with 0% interest and no fees to the patient.  The cost 
of the service is borne by the providers and employers.   
 
While a medical credit card typically offers its revolving line of credit to very few subprime 
consumers (<620 credit score), 25% of PayMedix participants are in the subprime category. This 
includes 10% with a credit score less than 480.  Most of these individuals would not access 
needed care without a Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service like PayMedix, which 
would suboptimize health outcomes and drive up overall healthcare costs since patients will 
end up sicker and ultimately utilize more expensive care.    
 
Medical payment products often find patients at a moment of great weakness – e.g., when they 
find out that they need surgery - without the ability to evaluate options or make a thoughtful 
financial decision. With the PayMedix program already in place, participants need never worry 
about provider-facilitated medical payment product being offered to them when they can least 
afford to make a bad choice. There is no need since PayMedix will have automatically already 
handled the transaction.  This is good for the patient, good for the healthcare provider, and 
good for society at large.  
 
c) Patient Benefits I: Simplified Billing Process 
 
Financial literacy with healthcare billing and insurance remains a chronic and systemic problem 
in the United States, with an estimated two-thirds of Americans unable to correctly define 
healthcare concepts and products like insurance premiums, co-payments, deductibles.16 This 
confusion and lack of knowledge contributes to consumers delaying payment to providers, as 
they are often uncertain if the balance due is fully adjudicated and final. In the PayMedix 
solution, consumers are presented with a simplified, yet comprehensive consolidated bill 
(SuperEOB). This statement clearly summarizes the balance after insurance from all adjudicated 
medical claims, as well as the total amount of payments that have already been made to in-
network providers on the employee’s behalf. This single monthly statement combines the detail 
of an Explanation of Benefits (EOB) with the attributes of a conventional “monthly billing 
statement.”   
 
This simplification is critical.  Today, the healthcare system overall spends a fortune to inundate 
consumers with complicated information that does not reconcile or make sense to most 
consumers.  Those who can and will pay their medical bills do so, but only eventually.  
Experienced consumers know that most of what they receive will not make sense and that they 
should wait until it is all sorted out.  In other words, we as a healthcare system have trained 
consumers to ignore us.   
 
Healthcare cost and quality improvement require consumers to be engaged.  Each provider 
implementing yet another billing or payment point solution could incrementally increase each 
 
16 Forbes, “U.S. Consumers Often Lack Literacy In Healthcare Finances” (Jun. 2021), available at 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/joshuacohen/2021/06/01/us-consumers-often-lack-literacy-in-healthcare-finances/. 

 
 
 
 
9
of their financial results for a time, but the overall increase in the volume of consumer billing 
and payment outreach is driving consumers away.  Think of someone getting surgery – the 
surgeon, the anesthesiologist, radiologist, pathologist, and facility will all bill and ping the 
consumer multiple times with a confusing array of often conflicting information.  Without a 
simple, single Source of Truth like the PayMedix SuperEOB, consumers are left confused, and 
providers are left to spend a fortune on increasingly intrusive and expensive collection efforts 
that still do not generate great yield.  
 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service includes making the patient’s 
out of pocket payment to healthcare providers on behalf of the employee. The consumer then 
pays PayMedix for the out-of-pocket amount that has been paid on their behalf. The consumer 
can reimburse PayMedix in full upfront or can create a payment plan to repay PayMedix over 
time. Unlike medical credit cards or installment loan products, repayment plans include no 
interest charges, late fees, hidden costs tied to defined promotional offers or retro-effective 
interest schemes if payment dates are missed. The employee is simply reimbursing for the face 
value of the medical bills already paid on their behalf by PayMedix. There is no cost to the 
employee to participate in the PayMedix solution. This is offered as an employer-subsidized 
program to all employees regardless their salaries, demographics, or credit histories. 
 
d) Patient Benefits II: Reduced Cost and Risk 
 
The PayMedix model does not charge any interest or fees to patients. There are no hidden fees, 
no teaser rates, and no deferred accrued interest. The cost of the PayMedix billing simplification 
service is covered by employers and healthcare providers. Employers pay a fee to offer this 
service to their employees. Providers receive a discounted amount of the post-adjudication 
patient balance and receive guaranteed payment from PayMedix. Patients pay nothing extra, 
and nothing in the PayMedix model contributes to increases in healthcare costs or medical 
inflation.  
 
If a patient needs a payment plan, PayMedix develops a payment plan that works for the 
individual’s particular needs and covers all the costs. This never includes interest charges, late 
fees, origination fees or any other additional expenses for the patient. 
 
PayMedix also supports all employer programs to encourage employees to seek less expensive 
care. This may include, for example, bundled payment programs, zero or low co-pay services at 
more efficient providers, and incentive programs (e.g., healthy living/ wellness or going to 
efficient providers). 
 
e) Provider Benefits I: No Promotional Role 
 
Medical credit cards and installment loans targeted for healthcare expenses are complicated 
financial products. Historically, patients have tended to place a high level of trust in their 
clinicians and their staff. As a result, companies offering medical payment products have often 

 
 
 
 
10 
relied on the provider to introduce and even recommend their products to patients. Promoting 
or at least attempts to guide their patients on selecting the most appropriate medical billing 
oversteps the standard administrative and collections responsibilities of a provider organization. 
It introduces the risk that a patient may receive unwanted or unneeded care that they cannot 
afford.  
 
PayMedix and similar models are not medical payment products and do not involve the 
provider’s staff in driving enrollment or communicating the benefits of participation to patients. 
PayMedix is a simplified billing service offered by employers to all employees, with no 
incentives, inducements, or other features to motivate providers to push patients into 
unnecessary care or extra financing costs. 
 
f) Provider Benefits II: Reduced Administrative Burden 
 
Administrative expenses in the U.S. healthcare system take many forms, but one of the most 
prominent is the process of validating and tabulating amounts owed from providing patient 
care, and then sending bills and collecting amounts due from patients. Hospitals, physician 
offices, surgery centers, labs, imaging centers, and other clinical facilities have invested in 
people and technology tools to accomplish these tasks.  
 
While the adoption of new revenue cycle technology and service solutions by clinical facilities 
has eased some of the burden of processing medical insurance claims, collecting balances owed 
by consumers remains a universal and expensive challenge for healthcare providers. Billing 
teams have invested in portal technologies to enable patient self-service, added payment 
innovations such as “card on file” to securely store credit card information for future payments, 
and started to utilize text messaging and robo-dialing to reach patients with overdue balances. 
Medical billing staff spend an enormous amount of time and money chasing patients with 
outstanding balances, and risk negatively impacting their patient relationships with the use of 
intrusive communication tools. 
 
The PayMedix model reduces the administrative strain and costs of patient collections for an 
individual provider and avoids damaging the provider-patient relationship. In exchange for a 
modest fee to participate in the PayMedix simplified billing solution, providers avoid incurring 
the costs associated with collecting overdue balance from patients participating in the PayMedix 
model. Providers send fewer billing statements and make fewer phone calls and are able to use 
their resources to focus on clinical care and ensure the best possible patient outcomes. 
Providers also appreciate that the PayMedix model is a non-recourse arrangement, so they have 
certainty of payment with no risk that non-performing patient accounts will “boomerang” back 
to their balance sheet.  
 
Furthermore, the PayMedix model helps to reduce the cost of patient collections across all 
participating providers. PayMedix centralizes patient collection activities in one organization and 
operates a compassionate, efficient collection process at scale. This lowers the unit cost of 

 
 
 
 
11 
overall patient collections below what each provider would achieve doing these activities on 
their own. 
 
g) Charity Care 
 
Unlike medical credit cards and installment loans targeted for medical expenses, providers 
assume no role in enrolling patients in the PayMedix service. Participating patients are enrolled 
in PayMedix through their employers. The providers play no role in introducing or incenting 
patients to participate in the PayMedix service.  
 
This means providers have no conflicted interests when identifying and helping their patients 
access other local, regional, or federal financial assistance programs. Importantly, the financial 
assistance process is not hindered by the patient’s participation in the PayMedix billing solution 
service. Furthermore, PayMedix helps consumers gather the necessary information and apply 
for financial assistance from healthcare providers. As of July 2023, PayMedix has assisted 
patients in qualifying for $750,000 of charity care for over 5,000 individual medical claims. This 
advocacy offered by PayMedix is communicated on the firm’s SuperEOB and elsewhere, and in 
these cases -- and with the consumer's permission -- PayMedix can assemble documents and 
aggregate key qualifying information to the health system on behalf of and with no fee to the 
consumer. PayMedix is not aware of examples in which medical credit cards and installment 
loan vendors intervene for their customers to identify charity care relief. 
 
h) Disputed Medical Bills  
With the PayMedix billing simplification service, patients can always challenge a bill. The 
PayMedix customer service team will support the patient in understanding and ultimately 
disputing any bill with which they disagree. Most customer disputes center on whether the 
claims should have been paid in the first place. Determining the correct answer to this question 
is the responsibility of the health plan. PayMedix will work with the health plan and the 
consumer if the consumer believes a claim should not have been paid and their out-of-pocket 
amount should have been $0. If the consumer is correct, then PayMedix will process any 
adjustments and refund the appropriate amount of money to the consumer.  
i) Consumer Protections 
 
While the three major U.S. credit reporting companies recently agreed to remove medical debt 
of less than $500 from credit reports, this only begins to address the way these balances affect 
patient credit. According to the U.S. Census, in 2017, 19% of U.S. households carried medical 
debt and the median amount owed was $2,000.17 One source estimates that most Americans 
 
17 U.S. Census, “19% of U.S. Households Could Not Afford to Pay for Medical Care Right Away” (Apr. 2021), available 
at https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2021/04/who-had-medical-debt-in-united-states.html.  

 
 
 
 
12 
with medical debt owe over $1,000.18 A substantial number of Americans will still see medical 
debt negatively affect both their credit scores and their ability to access financing for any needs. 
It is necessary to find solutions to address the high cost of health care without pushing more 
consumers to take on onerous and high-interest debt.  
 
Unpaid balances are also considered medical debt in the PayMedix model, not consumer debt 
as is the case with many types of medical payment products. 
 
3. Response to RFI Questions 
 
To better understand the medical payment product market, the agencies seek data and 
comments on the interest and fee costs of these products (including both interest rates and 
total accrued interest), the application and approval process for these products, and trends of 
medical payment product use.  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. “Medical payment products” is defined in the RFI as those “being administered 
by financial services companies, who manage the billing and collections process for these 
products and earn revenue through interest and fees.”  We do not charge patients any interest 
or fees.  We would suggest adding the word “limited” before “products” in this definition since 
many medical payment products are limited to certain individuals (e.g., those with higher credit 
scores), limited in duration (e.g., 12 months), and/or limited by a dollar cap (e.g., $2,000).  The 
PayMedix model has none of those limitations.   
 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service does not charge any interest or 
fees to patients. There are no hidden fees, no teaser rates, and no deferred accrued interest. The 
cost of the PayMedix service is covered by employers and healthcare providers. Employers pay a 
fee to offer this service to all their employees. Providers receive a discounted amount of the post-
adjudication patient balance and receive guaranteed payment from PayMedix. Patients pay 
nothing extra, and nothing in the PayMedix service contributes to increases in healthcare costs 
or medical inflation. If a patient needs a payment plan, PayMedix develops a payment plan that 
works for the individual’s particular needs and covers all of the costs. This never includes interest 
charges, late fees, origination fees or any other additional expenses for the patient. 
 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service does not exclude any consumer 
at employer clients for any reason, including credit score.  All in-network allowed charges are 
included, all the way to the out-of-pocket maximum.  Payment plans are customized for each 
individual, with PayMedix average currently 17 months. 
 
 
18 KFF-Peterson Health System Tracker, “The state of the U.S. health system in 2022 and the outlook for 2023” (Dec. 
2022), available at https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/brief/the-state-of-the-u-s-health-system-in-2022-and-
the-outlook-for-2023/.  

 
 
 
 
13 
The agencies also seek information as to the total outstanding consumer debt on medical 
credit cards, medical installment loans, and other medical payment products.  
 
No response provided. 
 
Data regarding the characteristics and demographics of medical payment products users is 
also welcome, such as whether users are insured or uninsured, whether certain populations 
or income groups are more likely to use these products, and whether use is concentrated in 
certain geographies or for patients seeking particular kinds of care.  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model.   
 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service is offered to consumers with 
health insurance. These consumers receive their health insurance through an employer’s group 
health insurance plan. An important feature of the PayMedix service is that unlike medical credit 
cards and installment loans targeted for post-service medical expenses, PayMedix does not 
require each patient to apply or be approved to qualify for the service. There is no review of 
employee credit history during enrollment, and no looking at other data sources that would be 
used to risk score patients and then adjust pricing and other terms at the individual level. Thus, 
PayMedix does not ‘cherry pick’ low-risk patients or seduce high-risk patients with gimmicky 
teaser rates. When an employer selects PayMedix as a benefit, all of its employees are offered 
credit up to their annual out of pocket maximum with 0% interest and no fees to the patient. 
While a medical credit card typically offers its revolving line of credit to very few subprime 
consumers (<620 credit score), 25% of PayMedix participants are in the subprime category. This 
includes 10% with a credit score less than 480. 
 
The agencies also seek to better understand the level of concentration in the medical 
payment product market, the ownership of medical payment product companies (including 
ownership by health care providers, health insurance issuers, or private equity firms), and the 
implications of these factors for competition and consumer choice.  
 
No response provided. 
 
To that end, the agencies seek specific information on the types of financial entities that offer 
medical credit cards and loans. 
 
No response provided. 
 
The agencies seek to understand to what extent medical credit cards and loans may hamper 
financial assistance and access to benefits, and any options for regulators to reduce such 
barriers.  
 

 
 
 
 
14 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model.  
 
Unlike medical credit cards and installment loans targeted for medical expenses, providers 
assume no role in enrolling patients in a Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service like 
PayMedix. Participating patients are enrolled in PayMedix through their employers. The 
providers play no role in introducing or incenting patients to participate in the PayMedix service.  
 
This means providers have no conflicted interests when identifying and helping their patients 
access other local, regional, or federal financial assistance programs. Importantly, the financial 
assistance process is not hindered by the patient’s participation in the PayMedix service. 
Furthermore, PayMedix helps participating consumers gather the necessary information and 
apply for financial assistance from healthcare providers. This is provided at no cost to the 
consumers.  As of July 2023, PayMedix has assisted patients in qualifying for $750,000 of charity 
care for over 5,000 individual medical claims. This advocacy offered by PayMedix is 
communicated on the firm’s SuperEOB and elsewhere, and in these cases -- and with the 
consumer's permission -- PayMedix can assemble documents and aggregate key qualifying 
information to the health system on behalf of the consumer. PayMedix is not aware of examples 
in which medical credit cards and installment loan vendors intervene for their customers to 
identify charity care relief. 
 
The agencies also seek to understand the extent to which health care providers, including tax-
exempt hospitals, screen patients for public or private insurance eligibility, financial assistance 
eligibility, or other benefits before offering them medical credit cards or loans.  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. PayMedix does offer a Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service.  In this 
model, all providers simply confirm private insurance eligibility.  PayMedix is available to all 
members of an employer’s health plan, and the providers do not ‘offer’ the consumers anything.  
The consumers were already enrolled via their employer before ever getting care.   
 
It is unclear to PayMedix how providers could determine financial assistance eligibility before 
providing care.  So much information is typically required – some that will not even be known by 
the provider at the point of care – that care delivery would be slowed, and consumers’ health 
would be put at further risk if providers were to be required to determine financial assistance 
eligibility before providing care.   
 
In the PayMedix model, there are no delays in delivering care and providers do not need to 
attempt to determine financial assistance eligibility up front.  Providers simply confirm 
consumers’ PayMedix eligibility and then know that that consumer balance will either be paid or 
that PayMedix will have, with the consumer’s permission, helped the consumer get financial 
assistance from the provider.  This service is provided at no cost to consumers.   
 

 
 
 
 
15 
The agencies additionally seek comment on how frequently patients discover billing errors 
after signing up for a medical payment product, the main sources of billing errors, and how 
paying medical bills via a medical payment product affects patients’ ability to dispute those 
bills. The agencies seek comment on how to ensure that patients retain their rights to 
challenge inaccurate bills regardless of payment method. 
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model.   
 
PayMedix does offer a Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service.  With the PayMedix 
model, patients can always challenge a bill. The PayMedix customer service team will support 
the patient in understanding and ultimately disputing any bill with which they disagree. Most 
customer disputes center on whether the claims should have been paid in the first 
place. Determining the correct answer to this question is the responsibility of the health plan. 
PayMedix works with the health plan and the consumer if the consumer believes a claim should 
not have been paid and their out-of-pocket amount should have been $0. If the consumer is 
correct, then PayMedix will process any adjustments and refund the appropriate amount of 
money to the consumer. 
 
It should be noted that consumer confusion can also play a role here.  Typically, consumers are 
inundated with EOBs (“Explanations of Benefits”) from their insurance plan, medical bills and 
“this is not a bill” statements from each provider they used.  Much of the information appears 
contradictory or incomplete to consumers, and so they wait to see how it all sorts out over time. 
 
In the PayMedix model, the consolidated monthly statement incorporates the information that 
populates standard EOBs as well as that on provider bills.  It is all in one place, and reconciled for 
the consumer.  The consumer can certainly challenge any charge, as explained elsewhere in 
these comments.  It is clear, however, exactly what the charge truly was. 
 
The agencies also seek comment on incentives offered by financial companies to health care 
providers for their promotion of medical payment products, including revenue-sharing and 
other incentives.  
 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service and similar models do not 
involve the provider’s staff in driving enrollment or communicating the benefits of participation 
to patients. The PayMedix service is offered by employers to all employees, with no incentives, 
inducements, or other features to motivate providers to push patients into unnecessary care or 
extra financing costs. 
 
The agencies are also interested in any training or other support that medical payment 
product companies offer to providers. The agencies are interested in whether such incentives 
or support might implicate the Federal anti-kickback statute or other laws or regulations.  
 

 
 
 
 
16 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
Provider staff is trained to understand the different billing process for patients who participate in 
the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service, and those who do not utilize 
PayMedix. When patients utilize the PayMedix service, the providers simply need to A) confirm 
eligibility as they normally do, B) provide care for all PayMedix members without needing to 
arrange for consumer payment, and C) receive full payment.  PayMedix handles collecting the 
balance due from the patient for the portion of the medical charge that is owed by the patient 
after insurance has paid its part.  
 
PayMedix does not pay incentives or fees to providers. 
 
The agencies also seek information regarding how plans and issuers’ billing and 
reimbursement practices affect health care providers’ decisions to offer and promote medical 
payment products. 
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
The agencies seek additional information on the prices or versions of standard charges offered 
to patients who use these products, and whether these charges are adequately disclosed in 
accordance with hospital price transparency requirements and No Surprises Act good faith 
estimate requirements.  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service is offered by employers, not 
providers. There are no fees or interest charged to consumers.  Since the PayMedix service and 
similar models do not involve the provider’s staff in driving enrollment or communicating the 
benefits of participation to patients, and since there are no consumer fees or interest being 
charged, there are no disclosures from the provider to the patient.  
 
The agencies seek information on whether medical payment product companies are operating 
outside of protections against credit reporting of medical collections items and against 
extraordinary collection actions by tax-exempt hospitals.  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
In the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service model, unpaid balances are 
considered medical debt, not consumer debt as is the case with many types of medical payment 
products. 

 
 
 
 
17 
 
Finally, the agencies seek to better understand how notice and consent requirements for post-
stabilization and non-emergency health care items or services under the No Surprises Act 
intersect with providers’ promotion of medical credit cards and loans to out-of-network 
patients. 
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service is offered by employers, not 
providers. Since the PayMedix service and similar models do not involve the provider’s staff in 
driving enrollment or communicating the benefits of participation to patients, there are no 
notice or consent requirements for the provider to give patients in the PayMedix model. There 
are also no fees or interest being charged to consumers in the PayMedix model. 
 
In general, the agencies welcome any information that allows us to better understand the 
impact of medical payment products on patients’ physical, mental, and financial health.  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. “Medical payment products” is defined in the RFI as those “being administered 
by financial services companies, who manage the billing and collections process for these 
products and earn revenue through interest and fees.”  We do not charge patients any interest 
or fees.  We would suggest adding the word “limited” before “products” in this definition since 
many medical payment products are limited to certain individuals (e.g., those with higher credit 
scores), limited in duration (e.g., 12 months), and/or limited by a dollar cap (e.g., $2,000).  The 
PayMedix model has none of those limitations.   
 
Given the above, most medical payment products will not help many consumers due to the 
limitations inherent in most of them.  A Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service like 
PayMedix, however, will.  The starts by including ALL consumers at a given employer regardless 
their individual credit ratings.  The result is clear -- while a medical credit card typically offers its 
revolving line of credit to very few subprime consumers (<620 credit score), 25% of PayMedix 
participants are in the subprime category. This includes 10% with a credit score less than 480.  
Most of these individuals would not access needed care without a Guaranteed Universal Billing 
and Payment Service like PayMedix.   
 
Providing access to care for lower-income individuals obviously improves their physical, mental, 
and financial health.   The ultimate data point regarding this is that PayMedix employer clients 
have seen annual trend increases of 2.5-3.4% -- about half what the market has experienced 
overall.  When people can get all of the care when they need it, health care issues are handled 
earlier.  This improves consumers’ health but also saves them and their employers money.   
 
Operationally, the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service brings multiple 
benefits to the patient, including a monthly billing statement that displays all medical charges 

 
 
 
 
18 
for the participant and family members. PayMedix’s service includes zero interest or fees due 
from the patient and offers payment plans customized to the unique circumstances of the family, 
which helps patients have lower cost of care. Employees have no incentive or encouragement to 
use more expensive providers or consume unnecessary care outside of their in-network 
providers. PayMedix is offered to all employees equally, provides an opportunity to dispute and 
correct erroneous charges, and supports patients in applying for financial assistance at no cost 
to the consumer. The PayMedix service helps all consumers afford the care they need, thus 
helping improve their physical and mental health. 
 
The agencies also welcome suggestions of actions Federal agencies could take to address 
harms caused by medical payment products and related issues connected to medical billing 
and collections or medical debt more generally.  
 
The Agencies should be lauded for their examination of the expanded use of medical payment 
products that impose an even greater financial burden on many patients, limit their 
creditworthiness, and raise overall healthcare costs. CFPB in particular should ensure full 
transparency for all medical credit cards, installment loans, and other medical payment 
products that carry interest charges and consumer fees and can cause significant increases in 
cost of care. Further, the Agencies should ensure that consumers have clear information 
regarding charity care eligibility and preserve their ability to negotiate bills and secure 
adjustments.  
 
We strongly urge the Agencies to consider the positive benefits of alternative offerings to 
traditional medical payment products. One such model that resolves many of the legitimate 
regulatory concerns of the medical credit card and installment loan category is the Guaranteed 
Universal Billing and Payment Service offered as an employer solution.  
 
Suggested actions: 
1. Encourage U.S. employers to play a bigger role in helping employees get access to the 
care they need, including improved ways to pay for the patient’s share of medical 
charges 
a. Provide tax advantages for offering Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment 
Services to employees 
2. Clarify the definition of medical payment products to include the word “limited” 
a. Medical payment products is defined in the RFI as those “being administered by 
financial services companies, who manage the billing and collections process for 
these products and earn revenue through interest and fees”.  We would suggest 
adding the word “limited” before “products” in this definition since many medical 
payment products are limited to certain individuals (e.g., those with higher credit 
scores), limited in duration (e.g., 12 months), and/or limited by a dollar cap (e.g., 
$2000) 
i. Any limitations like those above should be fully and prominently disclosed 
to consumers, providers, and employers 

 
 
 
 
19 
b. Consider further differentiating between financial products designed for limited 
or focused use for out-of-network or elective services and solutions designed to 
address consumer amounts due for in-network allowed charges after insurance 
i. For example, this could be as simple as not allowing any product with 
limitations such as those listed in 1.a above to be used for in-network 
allowed charges that go through insurance first 
ii. Similarly, products that charge consumers interest or fees for in-network 
allowed charges could be disallowed 
3. Focus federal rulemaking on simplifying information provided to consumers. 
a. It would be easy but counter-productive to significantly expand claim-by-claim 
disclosures to consumers. In healthcare, consumers are already overwhelmed and 
end up tuning it all out 
b. Instead, focus on consumers not transactions. 
i. For example, allow consumers to set their preferences for communications 
1. For investment accounts (e.g., at Schwab or Fidelity), consumers 
can elect to consolidate mandated reporting, assign access and 
reporting to a spouse, elect electronic not paper delivery, etc. 
2. Once preferences are set by the consumer, their agent can execute 
their instructions on their behalf 
ii. Review the intersection of state and federal disclosure requirements. 
1. Conflicting or overlapping requirements force market participants 
to conservatively include absolutely anything that could be 
required somewhere.  This drives more cost as well as consumer 
confusion 
a. It is far better to make sure consumers regularly know the 
top 5 things that will likely impact them than repeatedly try 
to tell them the 50 things that might possibly matter very 
occasionally.  Consumers may well take action based on 
the former, but will tune out and miss the key takeaways 
from the latter 
4. Make it clear that any debt that is the result of in-network, post-insurance medical costs 
should still be considered medical debt regardless of what product financed it.  All the 
rules regarding medical debt should still apply in this case 
 
a) General Questions 
 
Market Level Inquiries 
 
1. What are the benefits, costs, and risks of medical payment products for consumers, health 
care providers, and companies offering these products?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. “Medical payment products” is defined in the RFI as those “being administered 
by financial services companies, who manage the billing and collections process for these 

 
 
 
 
20 
products and earn revenue through interest and fees.”  We do not charge patients any interest 
or fees.  We would suggest adding the word “limited” before “products” in this definition since 
many medical payment products are limited to certain individuals (e.g., those with higher credit 
scores), limited in duration (e.g., 12 months), and/or limited by a dollar cap (e.g., $2,000).  The 
PayMedix model has none of those limitations.   
 
What PayMedix offers instead is a Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service.  This 
alternative model to medical payment products does not place additional financial burden on 
patients, preserves their creditworthiness, and treats all patients equitably and with dignity. This 
billing simplification service is being utilized by a growing number of patients. This model is 
addressing the payment challenges faced by patients covered by health plans, since 58% of 
provider bad debt is from patients with health insurance, a 5x increase in 3 years.19 
 
In this model, employers contract with a third party to reimburse healthcare providers for the 
out-of-pocket portion of the bill owed by their employees after they receive medical care. The 
third-party, for example PayMedix, is then responsible for collecting the out-of-pocket amount 
owed from the patient, who receives the PayMedix SuperEOB combining all billing and EOB 
information from all in-network providers they visit — no matter how many or how often — in 
one consolidated monthly statement. Patients see immediately what they owe, how to pay it, 
and how to get credit if they need it in the form of extended payment options. The provider is 
not involved in collecting balances due from these patients. 
 
Employers offer the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service to their 
employees to enhance their commercial group health insurance, and in particular provide a 
benefit to employees who have moved to a High Deductible Health Plans (HDHPs). Patients with 
a HDHP incur higher out of pocket medical expenses until they meet their annual deductible. 
Unlike medical payment products that are offered to patients after they receive care, patients 
enrolled in PayMedix know before they receive care that they have the flexibility and benefits of 
the PayMedix model. This certainty removes a stubborn and persistent source of a barrier care 
and allows the patient to proceed with needed medical services. 
 
For the employer, the PayMedix model provides an employee benefit that simplifies paying for 
in-network, out-of-pocket medical expenses for its workforce and reduces the stress and 
confusion that can further contribute to employee physical health issues. The characteristics and 
demographics of participating employees in the PayMedix billing service are representative of 
the full cross section of the employer’s workforce. The billing solution is the same for the CEO of 
the company as it is for an entry level hire.  
 
The PayMedix service brings multiple benefits to the patient, including a monthly billing 
statement that displays all medical charges for the participant and family members. PayMedix’s 
 
19 “Hospital collection rates for self-pay patient accounts” (Aug. 2022), available at https://www.crowe.com/-
/media/crowe/llp/widen-media-files-folder/h/hospital-collection-rates-for-self-pay-patient-accounts-report-
chc2305-001a.pdf.  

 
 
 
 
21 
service includes zero interest or fees due from the patient and offers payment plans customized 
to the unique circumstances of the family, which helps patients have lower cost of care. 
Employees have no incentive or encouragement to use more expensive providers or consume 
unnecessary care outside of their in-network providers. PayMedix is offered to all employees 
equally, provides an opportunity to dispute and correct erroneous charges, and supports 
patients in applying for financial assistance. The PayMedix service helps consumers afford the 
care they need, thus helping improve their physical and mental health. 
 
From the perspective of providers, the PayMedix model provides prompt pay for all in network 
patient balances for each participant opted into the billing simplification service through their 
employer’s benefit program.  The provider can focus on clinical and other operational 
responsibilities of running their practice. They do not promote the PayMedix model to patients, 
nor does it interfere with charity care or financial assistance programs, and therefore there is 
less chance that providers will offer unaffordable care that patients neither need nor want.  
 
2. What are the terms of medical payment products, including interest rates and fees?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model.  “Medical payment products” is defined in the RFI as those “being administered 
by financial services companies, who manage the billing and collections process for these 
products and earn revenue through interest and fees.”  We would suggest adding the word 
“limited” before “products” in this definition since many medical payment products are limited 
to certain individuals (e.g., those with higher credit scores), limited in duration (e.g., 12 months), 
and/or limited by a dollar cap (e.g., $2,000).  Limiting terms like these increase barriers to care 
for those less well-off, worsening their health and driving up healthcare costs system-wide.  
 
Unlike medical credit cards and installment loans and other medical payment products, the 
PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service does not charge any interest or 
fees to patients. There are no hidden fees, no teaser rates, and no deferred accrued interest. The 
cost of the PayMedix service is covered by employers and healthcare providers. Patients pay 
nothing extra, and removes barriers to accessing early-stage care and produces significant 
savings over time. If a patient needs a payment plan, PayMedix develops a payment plan that 
works for the individual’s particular needs and covers all of the costs. This never includes interest 
charges, late fees, origination fees or any other additional expenses for the patient.  There are 
no dollar caps or limits to the duration of a payment plan. 
 
3. How much debt do consumers carry on medical credit cards and loans in total, and what is 
the average individual debt level?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
4. How concentrated is the medical payment product market, and what role do private equity 
firms play in this market?  

 
 
 
 
22 
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
5. Are there specific populations (e.g., race, socioeconomic status, gender identity, sexual 
orientation, age, language, etc.) or geographic regions that experience disproportionately 
higher utilization of medical payment products?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
PayMedix does offer a Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service. Unlike medical credit 
cards and installment loans targeted for post-service medical expenses, PayMedix does not 
require each patient to apply or be approved to qualify for the service. There is no review of 
employee credit history during enrollment and no looking at other data sources that would be 
used to risk score patients and then adjust pricing and other terms at the individual level. Thus, 
PayMedix does not “cherry pick” low-risk patients or seduce high-risk patients with gimmicky 
teaser rates. When an employer selects PayMedix as a benefit, all of its employees are offered 
credit up to their annual in-network out of pocket maximum with 0% interest and no fees to the 
patient. 
 
While a medical credit card typically offers its revolving line of credit to very few subprime 
consumers (<620 credit score), 25% of PayMedix participants are in the subprime category. This 
includes 10% with a credit score less than 480.  
 
Medical payment products often find patients at a moment of great weakness – when told they 
need surgery, for example - without the ability to evaluate options or make a thoughtful 
financial decision. With the PayMedix service already in place, participants need never worry 
about provider-facilitated financing being offered to them when they can least afford to make a 
bad choice. This is good for the patient, good for the healthcare provider, and good for society at 
large.  
 
6. What are the health equity impacts of medical payment products and related billing and 
collection policies and practices?  
 
See response to Question 5 in General Questions, Market Level Inquiries for the health equity 
impact of the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service. 
 
i. Do medical payment products affect members of specific underserved communities 
differently, including members of Tribal communities and geographically isolated 
communities?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 

 
 
 
 
23 
 
The PayMedix service includes every member of an employer or group plan equally.  No income, 
demographic, geographic or personal differences among members matter, and all receive the 
same service and terms.   
 
ii. Do certain products or policies present opportunities to better serve members of 
underserved communities?  
 
No response provided. 
 
7. Patients can pay for care in many different ways, such as by medical credit card or loan, 
general purpose credit card, insurance, or through a zero-interest payment plan. What are 
the costs and benefits for health care providers of offering each of these methods? Are there 
situations where one method of payment is more advantageous than another?  
 
Historically, consumer healthcare costs in the commercial market (i.e., those not in a 
government health care program) have been dealt with in two ways: 
 
- 
In-network allowed charges.  These are the co-pays, deductibles, and out-of-pocket 
amounts for which consumers are responsible under their employer-provided health 
coverage and which received the best-negotiated price with providers 
o A combination of the provider, insurer, and employer could offer financial 
assistance to consumers in order to pay their portion (e.g., payment plans, 
HRAs/FSAs/HSAs, health/wellness incentive accounts, etc.) 
o Assistance was both guaranteed and universal for all consumers regardless their 
individual financial status 
o Consumers had a financial incentive to seek out cost-effective care 
 
- 
Out-of-network and elective care.  This is care that consumers choose to consume even 
though it will cost them more money and/or is not a covered medical benefit (e.g., 
cosmetic surgery) 
o If financed, the consumer could individually seek a credit product, or the provider 
could partner with a financial services firm to offer that function 
o Consumers are individually underwritten, and whether credit is offered and if so 
on what terms varies significantly 
o Consumer interest and fees are typically a key component of these products 
 
In the RFI, the Agencies defined medical payment products as those “being administered by 
financial services companies, who manage the billing and collections process for these 
products and earn revenue through interest and fees.”  These were the types of products that 
traditionally were sold for use in the out-of-network and elective care, and they filled a role in 
that arena.  More recently, though, these medical payment products have been brought to 
finance the in-network costs after insurance.   
 

 
 
 
 
24 
Many, including PayMedix, view this expansion of medical payment products as problematic.  
Any product for in-network allowed charges that does not apply to all individuals (regardless 
of their creditworthiness) and provide full coverage up to a patient’s out-of-pocket maximum 
is cherry-picking consumers with higher credit ratings.  This approach diminishes universal 
access to care, increases health inequity, and drives up overall healthcare costs.  A better 
approach for assisting consumers with their in-network allowed charges is a “Guaranteed 
Universal Billing and Payment Service”.  We define and explain this term below.  
 
This Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service is being utilized by a growing number of 
patients and is addressing the payment challenges faced by patients covered by health plans – 
since 58% of provider bad debt is from patients with health insurance, a 5x increase in 3 years.20 
In this model, employers contract with a third party to reimburse healthcare providers for the 
out-of-pocket portion of the in-network bill owed by their employees after they receive medical 
care. The third-party, for example PayMedix, is then responsible for collecting the out-of-pocket 
amount owed from the patient, who receives the PayMedix SuperEOB combining all billing and 
EOB information from healthcare providers they visit in one easy-to-read, consolidated monthly 
statement21. Patients see immediately what they owe, how to pay it, and how to get credit if 
they need it in the form of extended payment options. The provider is not involved in collecting 
balances due from these patients.  This alternative model does not place additional financial 
burden on patients, preserves their creditworthiness, and treats all patients equitably and with 
dignity. 
 
A breakdown of the components is as follows: 
 
Guaranteed.  Full payment is guaranteed to the providers on behalf of all consumers 
 
Universal.   All employees and their dependents are automatically included, and all in-network 
costs up to the full out-of-pocket maximum can be included.  No one is excluded for any reason. 
 
Billing.  All of the consumer’s provider bills and EOBs are reconciled automatically and are 
replaced by a simple monthly summary statement 
 
Payment.  Consumers can pay one bill that covers all of the participating providers, and if they 
need to pay over time then they can automatically get a no-fee, 0% interest payment plan 
 
Service.  Since PayMedix is funded by employers and providers, it is provided at no cost to the 
consumers 
 
 
20 “Hospital collection rates for self-pay patient accounts” (Aug. 2022), available at https://www.crowe.com/-
/media/crowe/llp/widen-media-files-folder/h/hospital-collection-rates-for-self-pay-patient-accounts-report-
chc2305-001a.pdf.  
21 Employees are able to use the Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service for medical claims generated 
with healthcare providers who are in-network for their health plan, and also in the PayMedix network.  

 
 
 
 
25 
The Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service approach also helps drive overall system 
efficiency.  Administrative expenses in the U.S. healthcare system take many forms, but one of 
the most prominent is the process of validating and tabulating amounts owed from providing 
patient care, and then sending bills and collecting amounts due from patients. Hospitals, 
physician offices, surgery centers, labs, imaging centers, and other clinical facilities have 
invested in people and technology tools to accomplish these tasks.  
 
While the adoption of new revenue cycle technology and service solutions by clinical facilities 
has eased some of the burden of processing medical insurance claims, collecting balances owed 
by consumers remains a universal and expensive challenge for healthcare providers. Billing 
teams have invested in portal technologies to enable patient self-service, added payment 
innovations such as “card on file” to securely store credit card information for future payments, 
and started to utilize text messaging and robo-dialing to reach patients with overdue balances. 
Medical billing staff spend an enormous amount of time and money chasing patients with 
outstanding balances, and risk negatively impacting their patient relationships with the use of 
intrusive communication tools. 
 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service reduces the administrative 
strain and costs of patient collections for an individual healthcare provider and avoids damaging 
the provider-patient relationship. In exchange for a modest fee to participate in the PayMedix 
simplified billing solution, providers avoid incurring the costs associated with collecting overdue 
balance from patients participating in the PayMedix model. Providers send fewer billing 
statements, make fewer phone calls, and are able to use their resources to focus on clinical care 
and ensure the best possible patient outcomes. Providers also appreciate that the PayMedix 
model is a non-recourse arrangement, so they have certainty of payment with no risk that non-
performing patient accounts will “boomerang” back to their balance sheet.  
 
The PayMedix model helps to reduce the cost of patient collections across all participating 
providers. PayMedix centralizes patient collection activities in one organization and operates a 
compassionate, efficient collection process at scale. This lowers the unit cost of overall patient 
collections below what each provider would achieve doing these activities on their own. 
 
8. What incentives do financial services companies offer health care providers, including 
revenue-sharing or other financial or non-financial incentives?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, thus the following are based on the 
company’s overall market observations. 
 
By contrast, a Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service and similar models do not 
involve the provider’s staff in driving enrollment or communicating the benefits of participation 
to patients. The PayMedix service is offered by employers to all employees, with no incentives, 
inducements or other features to motivate providers to push patients into unnecessary care or 
extra financing costs. 
 

 
 
 
 
26 
9. How do medical payment products and health insurance coverage interact? Do group 
health plan or health insurance issuer practices contribute to uptake of medical payment 
products by patients and providers? 
 
Employers offer the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service to their 
employees to enhance their commercial group health insurance, and in particular provide a 
benefit to employees who have moved to a High Deductible Health Plans (HDHPs). Patients with 
a HDHP incur higher out of pocket medical expenses until they meet their annual deductible. 
Unlike medical payment products that are offered to patients after they receive care, patients 
enrolled in PayMedix know before they receive care that they have the flexibility and benefits of 
the PayMedix model. This certainty removes a stubborn and persistent source of a barrier care 
and allows the patient to proceed with needed medical services. 
 
The characteristics and demographics of participating employees in the PayMedix service are 
representative of the full cross section of the employer’s workforce. The PayMedix service is the 
same for the CEO of the firm as it is for an entry level hire. This includes core service features 
such as the configuration of the consolidated bill (SuperEOB), and the flexibility of the employee 
to choose the most appropriate bill repayment plan based on their individual financial situation. 
 
i. How many days do providers typically have to wait to be paid by plans or issuers versus by 
medical payment product companies or general purpose credit card companies? What 
factors, such as administrative requirements or clinical reviews, contribute to any differential 
resolution timelines? 
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, thus the following are based on the 
company’s overall market observations. 
 
Many providers have told PayMedix representatives that various solutions under the RFI 
definition of “medical payment products” contain surprise fees for them. These are often 
characterized as “interchange fees” or “electronic payment fees”, and providers can get charged 
them in order to get paid they money they are already owed a little bit faster.   
 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service does not charge providers any 
interchange or electronic payment fees or any surprise fees to participating PayMedix providers.  
PayMedix has one fully disclosed fee that covers everything related to billing, payment and bad 
debt risk for all consumers at every employer client.   
 
ii. Does a patient’s use of a medical payment product exempt them from certain consumer 
protections, provider requirements, or group health plan or health insurance issuer 
requirements? Are different types of health coverage treated differently? 
 
While the three major U.S. credit reporting companies recently agreed to remove medical debt 
of less than $500 from credit reports, this only begins to address the way these balances affect 
patient credit. According to the U.S. Census, in 2017, 19% of U.S. households carried medical 

 
 
 
 
27 
debt and the median amount owed was $2,000.22 One source estimates that most Americans 
with medical debt owe over $1,000.23 A substantial number of Americans will still see medical 
debt negatively affect both their credit scores and their ability to access financing for any needs. 
It is necessary to find solutions to address the high cost of health care without pushing more 
consumers to take on onerous and high-interest debt.  
 
Unpaid balances are considered medical debt in the PayMedix model, not consumer debt as is 
the case with many types of medical payment products. 
 
10. Does health care provider organizational structure, including ownership by private equity, 
affect providers’ decisions to offer and promote these products? 
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
Provider organizational structure does not matter for the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal 
Billing and Payment Service. PayMedix and similar models do not involve the provider’s staff in 
driving enrollment or communicating the benefits of participation to patients. PayMedix is 
offered by employers to their employees, with no incentives, inducements, or other features to 
motivate providers to push patients into unnecessary care or extra financing costs. 
 
11. What are some best practices for health care providers who offer medical payment 
products in avoiding adverse financial and health impacts for patients?  
 
As discussed in the answer to Question 7, best practices for providers include: 
 
- 
Do not offer or promote medical payment products for the consumer portion of in-
network allowed charges that are covered by insurance 
o Solutions like a Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service offer a superior 
alternative for consumers, providers, and employers 
- 
Do not require payment before care is rendered for services that will be largely covered 
by insurance 
o Estimates of consumer balances due are difficult to determine due to changed 
coding details as well as timing of the submission of that particular claim versus 
others 
o Demanding a form of payment up front deters those who are concerned about 
how to pay for that care 
 
 
22 U.S. Census, “19% of U.S. Households Could Not Afford to Pay for Medical Care Right Away” (Apr. 2021), available 
at https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2021/04/who-had-medical-debt-in-united-states.html.  
23 KFF-Peterson Health System Tracker, “The state of the U.S. health system in 2022 and the outlook for 2023” (Dec. 
2022), available at https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/brief/the-state-of-the-u-s-health-system-in-2022-and-
the-outlook-for-2023/.  

 
 
 
 
28 
i. Are there specific tactics or practices that are well tailored and adapted for use by health 
care professionals in and serving underserved communities, including Tribal communities and 
geographically isolated communities? 
 
No response provided. 
 
ii. What actions should the agencies take to develop and encourage uptake of these 
established best practices? 
 
No response provided. 
 
iii. Are there examples of actions or best practices at the State or local level to which the 
Federal government should look? 
 
No response provided. 
 
12. To what extent are patients using medical payment products to pay bills that are 
incorrect, or that could be covered or defrayed by lower-cost alternatives?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
With the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service, patients can always 
challenge a bill. The PayMedix customer service team will support the patient in understanding 
and ultimately disputing any bill with which they disagree. Most customer disputes center on 
whether the claims should have been paid in the first place. Determining the correct answer to 
this question is the responsibility of the health plan. PayMedix will work with the health plan 
and the consumer if the consumer believes a claim should not have been paid and their out-of-
pocket amount should have been $0. If the consumer is correct, then PayMedix will process any 
adjustments and refund the appropriate amount of money to the consumer. 
 
Because providers play no role in introducing or incenting patients to participate in the 
PayMedix service, they have no conflicted interests when identifying and helping their patients 
access other local, regional, or federal financial assistance programs. Furthermore, PayMedix 
helps consumers gather the necessary information and apply for financial assistance from 
healthcare providers. As of July 2023, PayMedix has assisted patients in qualifying for $750,000 
of charity care for over 5,000 individual medical claims. This advocacy offered by PayMedix is 
communicated on the firm’s SuperEOB and elsewhere, and in these cases -- and with the 
consumer's permission and at no cost to the consumer -- PayMedix can assemble documents 
and aggregate key qualifying information to the health system on behalf of the consumer. 
PayMedix is not aware of examples in which medical credit cards and installment loan vendors 
intervene for their customers to identify charity care relief. 
 

 
 
 
 
29 
i. What billing errors may patients commonly encounter?  
 
Most customer disputes center on whether the claims should have been paid in the first 
place. Determining the correct answer to this question is the responsibility of the health plan. 
PayMedix will work with the health plan and the consumer if the consumer believes a claim 
should not have been paid and their out-of-pocket amount should have been $0. If the consumer 
is correct, then PayMedix will process any adjustments and refund the appropriate amount of 
money to the consumer. 
 
ii. How does using a medical payment product affect patients’ rights to dispute incorrect bills?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
With the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service, patients can always 
challenge a bill. The PayMedix customer service team will support the patient in understanding 
and ultimately disputing any bill with which they disagree. 
 
iii. Are certain groups of patients, such as members of specific underserved communities, 
more likely to experience medical billing errors or issues resolving disputes over bills paid 
using medical payment products?  
 
No response provided. 
 
13. What actions should agencies consider taking to better understand the effects of medical 
payment products on consumers and the health care industry, educate consumers and 
providers about the risks of these products, and collect complaints?  
 
No response provided. 
 
i. What are some sources of data on medical payment products? What additional data are 
needed to understand the impact of medical payment products on patients and the health 
care industry?  
 
No response provided. 
 
ii. What data collection, data analysis, and research actions should agencies take?  
 
No response provided. 
 
iii. Are there different or other actions that agencies should consider for underserved 
communities, including Tribal communities and geographically isolated communities?  
 
No response provided. 

 
 
 
 
30 
 
iv. What types of consumer complaints have States and localities received?  
 
No response provided. 
 
14. Where medical payment products are causing harm, what are some specific levers for 
regulatory oversight and enforcement by Federal agencies that regulate financial products or 
health care providers?  
 
No response provided. 
 
i. Are there specific areas for Federal enforcement actions?  
 
No response provided. 
 
ii. Are there examples of regulation or enforcement at the State or local level to which the 
Federal government should look?  
 
No response provided. 
 
iii. What complementary legislative actions are worth exploring? Where may additional 
statutory authority be needed?  
 
No response provided. 
 
Individual Inquiries  
 
1. Have medical payment products ever been marketed to you, including by your health care 
provider? If so, please describe your experience and how the products were marketed to you. 
Were other options, such as financial assistance, marketed or explained at the same time?  
 
No response provided. 
 
2. If you have used a medical credit card or loan to pay for your care, what was your 
experience with the product?  
 
No response provided. 
 
a. What benefits or harms did you experience?  
 
No response provided. 
 
b. Was your health affected by your use of a medical credit card or loan?  
 

 
 
 
 
31 
No response provided. 
 
c. How much did interest and fee charges add to the cost of your care?  
 
No response provided. 
 
d. How did using a medical credit card or loan affect your credit score and your ability to 
access credit?  
 
No response provided. 
 
e. Would you use a medical credit card or loan to cover medical expenses again? Why or why 
not?  
 
No response provided. 
 
3. Have you ever tried to dispute a medical bill you paid using a medical credit card or loan? If 
so, please describe your experience.  
No response provided. 
 
4. Have you ever had an overdue bill on a medical credit card or loan sent to collections? How 
quickly was the bill sent to collections? Did your experience with collections affect your credit 
score, your access to medical care, or your health?  
 
No response provided. 
 
5. Have you ever felt pressured to pay for care using a medical payment product or general 
purpose credit card when you believed that was not in your best interest? If so, please 
describe your experience.  
 
No response provided. 
 
6. Have you ever used or been pressured to use a medical credit card or loan to pay a bill that 
you believe should have been covered by your health insurance? If so, please describe your 
experience.  
 
No response provided. 
 
7. Have you ever used or been pressured to use a medical credit card or loan to pay a bill that 
you believe should have been covered by your health care provider’s financial assistance 
policy? If so, please describe your experience.  
 
No response provided. 
 

 
 
 
 
32 
8. Has your knowledge about the availability of medical credit cards or loans led you to 
believe that health insurance might not be necessary, or not acquire health insurance?  
 
No response provided. 
 
b) CFPB-Specific Questions  
 
1. What actions should the CFPB consider taking to address problematic practices related to 
medical credit cards or loans, including debt collection and credit reporting practices?  
 
The Agencies should be lauded for their examination of the expanded use of medical payment 
products that impose an even greater financial burden on many patients, limit their 
creditworthiness, and raise overall healthcare costs. CFPB in particular should ensure full 
transparency for all medical credit cards, installment loans, and other medical payment 
products that carry interest charges and consumer fees and can cause significant increases in 
cost of care. Further, the Agencies should ensure that consumers have clear information 
regarding charity care eligibility and preserve their ability to negotiate bills and secure 
adjustments.  
 
We strongly urge the Agencies to consider the positive benefits of alternative offerings to 
traditional medical payment products. One such model that resolves many of the legitimate 
regulatory concerns of the medical credit card and installment loan category is the Guaranteed 
Universal Billing and Payment Service offered as an employer solution.  
 
Suggested actions: 
1. Encourage U.S. employers to play a bigger role in helping employees get access to the 
care they need, including improved ways to pay for the patient’s share of medical 
charges 
a. Provide tax advantages for offering Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment 
Services to employees 
2. Clarify the definition of medical payment products to include the word “limited” 
a. Medical payment products is defined in the RFI as those “being administered by 
financial services companies, who manage the billing and collections process for 
these products and earn revenue through interest and fees”.  We would suggest 
adding the word “limited” before “products” in this definition since many medical 
payment products are limited to certain individuals (e.g., those with higher credit 
scores), limited in duration (e.g., 12 months), and/or limited by a dollar cap (e.g., 
$2000) 
i. Any limitations like those above should be fully and prominently disclosed 
to consumers, providers, and employers 
b. Consider further differentiating between financial products designed for limited 
or focused use for out-of-network or elective services and solutions designed to 
address consumer amounts due for in-network allowed charges after insurance 

 
 
 
 
33 
i. For example, this could be as simple as not allowing any product with 
limitations such as those listed in 1.a above to be used for in-network 
allowed charges that go through insurance first 
ii. Similarly, products that charge consumers interest or fees for in-network 
allowed charges could be disallowed 
3. Focus federal rulemaking on simplifying information provided to consumers. 
a. It would be easy but counter-productive to significantly expand claim-by-claim 
disclosures to consumers. In healthcare, consumers are already overwhelmed and 
end up tuning it all out 
b. Instead, focus on consumers not transactions. 
i. For example, allow consumers to set their preferences for communications 
1. For investment accounts (e.g., at Schwab or Fidelity), consumers 
can elect to consolidate mandated reporting, assign access and 
reporting to a spouse, elect electronic not paper delivery, etc. 
2. Once preferences are set by the consumer, their agent can execute 
their instructions on their behalf 
ii. Review the intersection of state and federal disclosure requirements. 
1. Conflicting or overlapping requirements force market participants 
to conservatively include absolutely anything that could be 
required somewhere.  This drives more cost as well as consumer 
confusion 
a. It is far better to make sure consumers regularly know the 
top 5 things that will likely impact them than repeatedly try 
to tell them the 50 things that might possibly matter very 
occasionally.  Consumers may well take action based on 
the former, but will tune out and miss the key takeaways 
from the latter 
4. Make it clear that any debt that is the result of in-network, post-insurance medical costs 
should still be considered medical debt regardless of what product financed it.  All the 
rules regarding medical debt should still apply in this case 
 
2. How do firms offering medical financial products typically market to providers?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model.   
 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Solution and similar models do not 
involve the provider’s staff in driving enrollment or communicating the benefits of participation 
to patients. PayMedix is offered by employers to their employees, with no incentives, 
inducements, or other features to motivate providers to push patients into unnecessary care or 
extra financing costs. 
 

 
 
 
 
34 
3. How do creditors and their affiliates underwrite loans to patients? What specific factors 
(e.g., age, type of medical procedure, credit score, etc.) are considered in underwriting?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model.   
 
An important feature of the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service is that 
unlike medical credit cards and installment loans targeted for post-service medical expenses, 
PayMedix does not require each patient to apply or be approved to qualify for the service. There 
is no review of employee credit history during enrollment and no looking at other data sources 
that would be used to risk score patients and then adjust pricing and other terms at the 
individual level. Thus, PayMedix does not ‘cherry pick’ low-risk patients or seduce high-risk 
patients with gimmicky teaser rates. When an employer selects PayMedix as a benefit, all of its 
employees are offered credit up to their annual out of pocket maximum for all in-network 
allowed charges with 0% interest and no fees to the patient. 
 
While a medical credit card typically offers its revolving line of credit to very few subprime 
consumers (<620 credit score), 25% of PayMedix participants are in the subprime category. This 
includes 10% with a credit score less than 480. 
 
4. Do consumers understand the risks of paying medical bills via a medical credit card, 
installment loan, or other commercial payment product, including lowered ability to 
negotiate their bill with their provider?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model.   
 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service makes the patient’s out of 
pocket payment to healthcare providers on behalf of the patient. The patient then pays 
PayMedix for the out-of-pocket amount that has been paid on their behalf. The patient can 
reimburse PayMedix in full or can create a payment plan to repay PayMedix over time. Unlike 
medical credit cards or installment loan products, repayment plans include no interest charges, 
late fees, hidden costs tied to defined promotional offers or retro-effective interest schemes if 
payment dates are missed. The patient is simply reimbursing for the face value of the medical 
bills already paid on their behalf by PayMedix. There is no cost to the patient to participate in 
the PayMedix service. This is offered as an employer-subsidized benefit to all employees 
regardless of their individual salary, demographics or credit history. 
 
If a patient needs a payment plan, PayMedix develops a payment plan that works for the 
individual’s particular needs and covers all of the costs. This never includes interest charges, late 
fees, origination fees or any other additional expenses for the patient.  It can extend to the 
appropriate time period for that particular consumer.  Currently, PayMedix members with 
payment plans average 17 months with a balance of $2311.  If they all were in a medical 
payment product instead – which presumes that they all would have been approved, which is 

 
 
 
 
35 
highly unlikely – then they would need 22 months to pay off the balance at the same monthly 
payment pace, and have incurred over $575 in interest if at a 25% annual rate.   
 
PayMedix also helps consumers gather the necessary information and apply for financial 
assistance from healthcare providers. As of July 2023, PayMedix has assisted patients in 
qualifying for $750,000 of charity care for over 5,000 individual medical claims. This advocacy 
offered by PayMedix is communicated on the firm’s SuperEOB and elsewhere, and in these cases 
-- and with the consumer's permission -- PayMedix can assemble documents and aggregate key 
qualifying information to the health system on behalf of the consumer. Medical credit cards and 
installment loan vendors to our knowledge do not intervene for their customers to identify 
charity care relief. 
 
With the PayMedix service, patients can always challenge a bill. The PayMedix customer service 
team will support the patient in understanding and ultimately disputing any bill with which they 
disagree. Most customer disputes center on whether the claims should have been paid in the 
first place. Determining the correct answer to this question is the responsibility of the health 
plan. PayMedix will work with the health plan and the consumer if the consumer believes a 
claim should not have been paid and their out-of-pocket amount should have been $0. If the 
consumer is correct, then PayMedix will process any adjustments and refund the appropriate 
amount of money to the consumer. 
 
5. To what extent are alleged debts placed on medical credit cards and loans sent to debt 
collectors? How do medical payment product companies’ debt collection practices differ from 
those of health care providers, and are any issuer or provider debt collection practices posing 
risks to consumers?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model.   
 
6. How can the CFPB use its authorities to ensure people with medical bills in collections, 
including medical payment product debt, are screened for eligibility for financial assistance 
and other benefits?  
 
No response provided. 
 
7. How are health care providers and financial companies using credit or “propensity to pay” 
scores to determine patients’ eligibility for financial assistance or medical payment products? 
What are the implications for compliance with the Fair Credit Reporting Act or other CFPB 
authorities?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model.   
 
 

 
 
 
 
36 
An important feature of the PayMedix model is that unlike medical credit cards and installment 
loans targeted for post-service medical expenses, PayMedix does not require each patient to 
apply or be approved to qualify for the service. There is no review of employee credit history 
during enrollment and no looking at other data sources that would be used to risk score patients 
and then adjust pricing and other terms at the individual level. Thus, PayMedix does not ‘cherry 
pick’ low-risk patients or seduce high-risk patients with gimmicky teaser rates. When an 
employer selects PayMedix as a benefit, all of its employees are offered credit up to their annual 
out of pocket maximum with 0% interest and no fees to the patient. 
 
While a medical credit card typically offers its revolving line of credit to very few subprime 
consumers (<620 credit score), 25% of PayMedix participants are in the subprime category. This 
includes 10% with a credit score less than 480. 
 
PayMedix helps consumers gather the necessary information and apply for financial assistance 
from healthcare providers at no cost to the consumer. As of July 2023, PayMedix has assisted 
patients in qualifying for $750,000 of charity care for over 5,000 individual medical claims. This 
advocacy offered by PayMedix is communicated on the firm’s SuperEOB and elsewhere, and in 
these cases -- and with the consumer's permission -- PayMedix can assemble documents and 
aggregate key qualifying information to the health system on behalf of the consumer. PayMedix 
is not aware of examples in which medical credit cards and installment loan vendors intervene 
for their customers to identify charity care relief. 
 
8. When hospitals write off a patient’s debt as uncollectible or “bad debt” and cease attempts 
to collect, do they notify patients that collection attempts will cease? Would patients benefit 
from such notifications, and would such notifications reduce hospital revenue?  
 
No response provided. 
 
c) HHS-Specific Questions  
 
1. What actions should HHS consider taking to address problematic practices related to 
medical credit cards or loans, particularly as they relate to patients eligible for or enrolled in 
Medicare, Medicaid, or the Children’s Health Insurance Program, or patients enrolled in 
Affordable Care Act Marketplace plans?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. Also, PayMedix currently only serves the commercial group market, and 
therefore does not have experience with Medicare, Medicaid, or the Children’s Health Insurance 
Program, or patients enrolled in Affordable Care Act Marketplace plans.   
 

 
 
 
 
37 
Nevertheless, it is important to note that HHS has recently issued initial guidance regarding the 
implementation of “smoothing” for Medicare drug plans.24  In effect, health plans must offer 
financing for drug costs to their Medicare members who have drug coverage, and that financing 
must go all the way to the $2,000 individual cap.  All members are to be eligible for this 
program, and no interest or consumer fees are to be charged. 
 
Conceptually, this is similar to what the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment 
Service has been doing for 15 years.  PayMedix has transacted $5 billion through this 
mechanism, has very high client retention and consumer satisfaction, and has reduced financial 
barriers to care.   
 
As implementation of the new Medicare drug cost “smoothing” program proceeds, HHS should 
carefully evaluate which elements of ‘medical payment products’ would be appropriate and 
which may not. Health plans and consumers will need clear guidance.   
 
2. What types of health insurance (Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance, etc.) are 
particularly associated with the likelihood that an individual is offered or makes use of 
medical credit cards and loans, and how does the type of health coverage affect relevant 
provider billing practices? 
 
Employers offer the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service to their 
employees to enhance their benefits program, and in particular provide assistance to employees 
who have moved to a High Deductible Health Plans (HDHPs). Patients with a HDHP incur higher 
out of pocket medical expenses until they meet their annual deductible. The PayMedix service is 
not currently offered to participants in Medicare, Medicaid or non-group commercial plans. 
 
3. Are there particular health care provider types that are most associated with being offered 
or offering medical payment products, and are these providers receiving directed payments 
or other incentives through State Medicaid programs?  
 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service and similar models do not 
involve the provider’s staff in driving enrollment or communicating the benefits of participation 
to patients. The PayMedix service is not offered in the Medicaid market. 
 
4. Has the No Surprises Act and its surprise billing protections affected the prevalence and use 
of medical credit cards and loans, and if so, how?  
 
The No Surprises Act and its surprise billing protections have not affected the PayMedix 
Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service, since providers are not involved in promoting 
 
24 Health Affairs, “Smoothing Medicare Part D Out-Of-Pocket Costs Under The Inflation Reduction Act” (Feb. 2023), 
available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/content/forefront/smoothing-part-d-out-pocket-costs-under-inflation-
reduction-act. 

 
 
 
 
38 
the PayMedix service to patients and have no role in disclosures or price transparency rules.  
PayMedix also charges no fees or interest to consumers.   
 
i. Has the notice and consent process been used to promote medical cards and loans to 
patients seeking health care items or services from out-of-network providers/facilities, and if 
so, how? For example, in instances where the No Surprises Act permits providers and 
facilities to seek notice and obtain consent from an insured patient to waive their balance 
billing and cost-sharing protections under the No Surprises Act, are providers and facilities 
impermissibly attaching or incorporating medical card or loan documents or information to 
the notice and consent forms, or giving them to the patient at the same time as the notice 
and consent forms?  
 
No response provided. 
 
ii. What steps are health care providers and facilities putting into place to ensure that bills 
paid through medical payment products do not violate surprise billing requirements and that 
patients who use medical payment products retain their No Surprises Act rights?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
5. How does or might the use of medical credit cards and loans affect the amount and timing 
of cost sharing a patient covered through Medicare, Medicaid, and/or the Affordable Care Act 
Marketplace owes for a covered service?  
 
No response provided. 
 
i. Are there any observable differences in cost sharing among patients belonging to 
underserved communities, such as Tribal communities or geographically isolated 
communities?  
 
No response provided. 
 
6. Hospital Price Transparency: What prices or versions of standard charges (e.g., cash prices) 
are offered to patients who sign up for a medical credit card or installment loan? What steps 
are taken by health care providers to ensure these charges are adequately disclosed in 
accordance with hospital price transparency requirements? Do these charges reflect and 
specifically identify facility fees?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 

 
 
 
 
39 
7. How might HHS improve patient understanding of options for covering the cost of medical 
treatments? At what points in the care process could patients be provided with information 
about their financial obligations and payment options?  
 
HHS has made good initial progress with its price transparency efforts.   
 
The question regarding consumers’ financial obligations – what percentage of that total cost 
they may owe – is complicated by timing.  Depending upon where a consumer is with respect to 
deductible and out-of-pocket accumulators, the order in which a series of claims may be 
submitted by the various providers to the insurance company/TPA and the order in which they 
are adjudicated can impact the amount of patient obligation remaining for each claim.  Putting 
a “hold” on the consumer balance – similar to how a hotel can put a “hold” on one’s credit card 
when checking in – is impractical when the whole billing and adjudication process can easily 
take a month.   
 
Consumers today simply do not understand what their EOBs really mean and how they do or do 
not reconcile with the bills and estimates that they receive from providers. Giving that volume of 
incomprehensible information to consumers earlier in the process is unlikely to be helpful to 
them. 
 
As a result, PayMedix has chosen to focus on post-adjudication balances owed by patients. 
PayMedix replaces the volume of EOBs and provider bills with one simple, monthly statement 
that summarizes everything that happened.  PayMedix members greatly value having One 
Source of Truth and knowing exactly what they do have as a financial obligation.  With that 
clear understanding, consumers can then focus on determining their payment options. 
 
Anti-Kickback Statute  
 
8. What financial relationships exist between medical payment product companies and 
health care providers? For example, do companies provide financial incentives to providers 
who enroll patients in medical payment products? Do providers pay financial companies to 
collect patients’ overdue balances? Or do providers have arrangements with financial 
companies to indemnify the company in whole or in part if the patient defaults, such as an 
arrangement that when patients default on their debt to the financial company, the debt 
reverts to the provider?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
The cost of the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service is covered by 
employers and healthcare providers. The PayMedix model is a non-recourse arrangement, so 
providers have no risk that non-performing patient accounts will revert back to their balance 
sheet. 
 

 
 
 
 
40 
9. Do health care providers or financial institutions market or recommend medical credit 
cards or loans to Federal health care program beneficiaries (e.g. Medicare, Medicaid, 
Affordable Care Act Marketplace, or Children’s Health Insurance Program enrollees)? Is the 
use of these products limited to certain types of health care items or services, such as items 
and services that are not reimbursable by Medicare or another third-party payor?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
The PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Solution and similar models do not 
involve the provider’s staff in driving enrollment or communicating the benefits of participation 
to patients. PayMedix is offered by employers to their employees, with no incentives, 
inducements or other features to motivate providers to push patients into unnecessary care or 
extra financing costs.  PayMedix does not serve Medicare, Medicaid, ACA Marketplace or CHIP 
enrollees. 
 
10. Do medical payment product companies recommend certain health care providers to 
their users? Do companies limit where or how patients use medical credit cards?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
Patients receive the full benefits of the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment 
Service when they visit providers who have agreed to participate in the PayMedix provider 
network.   
 
11. Is the health care provider (or the medical payment product company) offsetting some of 
the patient’s medical debt or providing any other incentives to the patient (e.g., travel 
rewards for charges to the card)?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. 
 
In the PayMedix Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service, employers contract with 
PayMedix for PayMedix to reimburse healthcare providers for the out-of-pocket portion of the 
in-network charges owed by their employees after they receive medical care. PayMedix is then 
responsible for collecting the out-of-pocket amount owed from the patient, who receives the 
PayMedix SuperEOB combining all billing and EOB information from all in-network providers 
they visit — no matter how many or how often — in one consolidated monthly statement. 
Patients see immediately what they owe, how to pay it, and how to get credit if they need it in 
the form of extended payment options. There are currently no offsets to the patient’s medical 
debt or incentives to the patient from PayMedix.  
 

 
 
 
 
41 
d) Treasury-Specific Questions  
 
1. What policy actions should Treasury consider taking to address problematic practices 
related to medical credit cards or loans, including debt collection and credit reporting 
practices, to conform with the existing tax laws and regulations pertaining to tax-exempt 
hospitals?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model.  
 
2. Should a tax-exempt hospital’s signing patients up for medical payment products be 
considered similar to a tax-exempt hospital’s selling medical debt, such that the special rules 
that only exclude debt sales from being extraordinary collection actions if certain 
requirements are met would be applied to these payment products?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model. In general, whether a consumer receivable is, in effect, factored on the front end 
or the back end of the process should not matter. It would be reasonable to presume that the 
same special rules would apply.  See above to the Introduction section for a description of the 
PayMedix model. 
 
3. How would applying the debt sale special rules to payment products change hospitals and 
payment product providers’ current practices, especially those related to financial assistance 
eligibility screening, extraordinary collection actions, interest rates, and recall or return of 
balances owed by FAP-eligible individuals?  
 
No response provided.   
 
4. How do tax-exempt hospitals’ promotion of medical payment products compare to their 
operationalization of the requirement that their financial assistance policies be widely 
publicized?  
 
No response provided. 
 
5. What are best practices for hospitals publishing and making patients aware of financial 
assistance programs (beyond compliance with the widely publicized requirements found in 
the section 501(r) regulations)?  
 
No response provided. 
 
6. Are medical payment product companies advertising their products as delivering 
community benefits or as a form of financial assistance?  
 
No response provided. 

 
 
 
 
42 
 
7. Are tax-exempt hospitals claiming that their promotion of medical payment products 
delivers community benefits or provides financial assistance, including in their filings of Form 
990, Schedule H?  
 
No response provided. 
 
8. Does the availability of medical payment products generally benefit the community or 
assist patients financially?  
 
PayMedix does not offer a medical payment product, as defined in the RFI, and cannot comment 
on that model.  More generally, however, PayMedix can offer the following perspective and 
potential actions regarding the broader market: 
 
Historically, consumer healthcare costs in the commercial market (i.e., those not in a 
government health care program) have been dealt with in two ways: 
 
- 
In-network allowed charges.  These are the co-pays, deductibles, and out-of-pocket 
amounts for which consumers are responsible under their employer-provided health 
coverage and which received the best-negotiated price with providers 
o A combination of the provider, insurer, and employer could offer financial 
assistance to consumers in order to pay their portion (e.g., payment plans, 
HRAs/FSAs/HSAs, health/wellness incentive accounts, etc.) 
o Assistance was both guaranteed and universal for all consumers regardless their 
individual financial status 
o Consumers had a financial incentive to seek out cost-effective care 
 
- 
Out-of-network and elective care.  This is care that consumers choose to consume even 
though it will cost them more money and/or is not a covered medical benefit (e.g., 
cosmetic surgery) 
o If financed, the consumer could individually seek a credit product, or the provider 
could partner with a financial services firm to offer that function 
o Consumers are individually underwritten, and whether credit is offered and if so 
on what terms vary significantly 
o Consumer interest and fees are typically a key component of these products 
 
In the RFI, the Agencies defined medical payment products as those “being administered by 
financial services companies, who manage the billing and collections process for these 
products and earn revenue through interest and fees.”  These were the types of products that 
traditionally were sold for use in the out-of-network and elective care, and they filled a role in 
that arena.  More recently, though, these medical payment products have been brought to 
finance the in-network costs after insurance.   
 

 
 
 
 
43 
Many, including PayMedix, view this expansion of medical payment products as problematic.  
Any product for in-network allowed charges that does not apply to all individuals (regardless 
of their creditworthiness) and provide full coverage up to a patient’s out-of-pocket maximum 
is cherry-picking consumers.  This approach diminishes universal access to care, increases 
health inequity, and drives up overall healthcare costs.  A better approach for assisting 
consumers with their in-network allowed charges is a “Guaranteed Universal Billing and 
Payment Service”.  We define and explain this term below.  
 
This Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service is being utilized by a growing number of 
patients and is addressing the payment challenges faced by patients covered by health plans – 
since 58% of provider bad debt is from patients with health insurance, a 5x increase in 3 years.25 
In this model, employers contract with a third party to reimburse healthcare providers for the 
out-of-pocket portion of the in-network bill owed by their employees after they receive medical 
care. The third-party, for example PayMedix, is then responsible for collecting the out-of-pocket 
amount owed from the patient, who receives the PayMedix SuperEOB combining all billing and 
EOB information from healthcare providers they visit in one easy-to-read, consolidated monthly 
statement26. Patients see immediately what they owe, how to pay it, and how to get credit if 
they need it in the form of extended payment options. The provider is not involved in collecting 
balances due from these patients.  This alternative model does not place additional financial 
burden on patients, preserves their creditworthiness, and treats all patients equitably and with 
dignity. 
 
A breakdown of the components is as follows: 
 
Guaranteed.  Payment is guaranteed to the providers on behalf of all consumers. 
 
Universal.  All employees and their dependents are automatically included, and all in-network 
costs up to the full out-of-pocket maximum can be included.  No one is excluded for any reason. 
 
Billing.  All of the consumer’s medical bills and EOBs are reconciled automatically and are 
replaced by a simple monthly summary statement. 
 
Payment.  Consumers can pay one bill that covers all of the participating providers, and if they 
need to pay over time then they can automatically get a no-fee, 0% interest payment plan. 
 
Service.  Since PayMedix is funded by employers and providers, it is provided at no cost to the 
consumer. 
 
 
 
25 “Hospital collection rates for self-pay patient accounts” (Aug. 2022), available at https://www.crowe.com/-
/media/crowe/llp/widen-media-files-folder/h/hospital-collection-rates-for-self-pay-patient-accounts-report-
chc2305-001a.pdf.  
26 Employees are able to use the Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service for medical claims generated 
with healthcare providers who are in-network for their health plan, and also in the PayMedix network.  

 
 
 
 
44 
The PayMedix service brings multiple benefits to the patient, including a monthly billing 
statement that displays all medical charges for the participant and family members. PayMedix’s 
service includes zero interest or fees due from the patient and offers payment plans customized 
to the unique circumstances of the family, which helps patients have lower cost of care. 
Employees have no incentive or encouragement to use more expensive providers or consume 
unnecessary care outside of their in-network providers. PayMedix is offered to all employees 
equally, provides an opportunity to dispute and correct erroneous charges, and supports 
patients in applying for financial assistance. The PayMedix service helps consumers afford the 
care they need, thus helping improve their physical and mental health. 
 
For the consumer portion due from in-network allowed charges after insurance, PayMedix does 
not believe that medical payment products generally benefit the community or generally assist 
patients financially.  For that, the Guaranteed Universal Billing and Payment Service does deliver 
community and consumer benefit. 
 
PayMedix does believe that medical payment products have been successfully used for out-of-
network care, elective services, and non-medical coverage (e.g., Lasik or dental care).  Having 
them properly continue in that arena could be appropriate.   
 
4. Conclusion 
 
We strongly urge that the CFPB, HHS and Department of Treasury consider the positive benefits 
of alternative offerings to traditional medical payment products for the consumer portion of in-
network allowed charges after insurance. One such model that resolves many of the legitimate 
regulatory concerns of the medical credit card and installment loan category is the Guaranteed 
Universal Billing and Payment Service offered as an employer benefit solution. PayMedix is an 
example of a vendor operating in this emerging category. PayMedix’s model is attractive for 
each of the stakeholders served. 
 
The PayMedix service brings multiple benefits to the patient, including a monthly billing 
statement that displays all medical charges for the participant and family members. PayMedix’s 
service includes zero interest or fees due from the patient and offers payment plans customized 
to the unique circumstances of the family, which helps patients have lower cost of care. 
Employees have no incentive or encouragement to use more expensive providers or consume 
unnecessary care outside of their in-network providers. PayMedix is offered to all employees 
equally, provides an opportunity to dispute and correct erroneous charges, and supports 
patients in applying for financial assistance. The PayMedix service helps all consumers afford the 
care they need, thus helping improve their physical and mental health. 
 
From the perspective of providers, the PayMedix model provides prompt pay for all in-network 
patient balances for each participant opted into the billing simplification service through their 
employer.  The provider can focus on clinical and other operational responsibilities of running 

 
 
 
 
45 
their practice. They do not promote the PayMedix model to patients, nor does it interfere with 
charity care or financial assistance programs.  
 
For the employer, the PayMedix model provides to employees a product that simplifies paying 
for in-network, out-of-pocket medical expenses for its workforce and reduces the stress and 
confusion that can further contribute to employee physical health issues.  In addition, PayMedix 
employer clients have seen annual medical trend increases of 2.5-3.4% -- about half what the 
market has experienced overall.  When people can get the care they need it when they need it, 
health care issues are handled earlier.  This not only improves consumers’ health but also saves 
them and their employers money.   
 
Out of pocket healthcare costs present a significant and urgent issue for many Americans. While 
traditional medical credit cards and installment loans are widely used today, they also present 
several issues for consumers when used for care traditionally financed by employers, insurers, 
and providers.  It is important that the Agencies recognize alternative, innovative models to 
lower overall medical billing costs and to ensure that all consumers can afford the care they 
need.  
 
 
PayMedix understands that our model is unusual and innovative.  We would be happy to meet 
with the agencies to discuss in more detail how we can work together to help consumers get 
access to the healthcare they need. 
 
We may be contacted at the following: 
1000 North Water St., Suite 1100 
Milwaukee, WI  53202 
 
www.paymedix.com 
 
Jourdan Miller 
jmiller@hps.md 
 
 
 
