 
 
 
Submitted via Regulations.gov 
 
September 11, 2023 
 
Rulemaking Petitions Docket 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
1700 G Street NW 
Washington, D.C. 20552 
 
Re: Comment Intake— The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services, and the Department of the Treasury’s request concerning medical credit 
cards, loans, and other financial products used to pay for health care. (Docket No. CFPB–
2023–0038). 
 
Dear Director Chopra: 
 
On behalf of the Association of Credit and Collection Professionals (“ACA International” or 
“Association”), I am writing in response to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (“Bureau” or 
“CFPB”), Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, and the Department of the Treasury’s Request 
for Information (“RFI”) concerning medical credit cards, loans, and other financial products used to 
pay for health care. 
 
ACA International represents approximately 1,800 members, including credit grantors, third-party 
collection agencies, asset buyers, attorneys, and vendor affiliates, in an industry that employs more 
than 133,000 people worldwide. Most ACA International member debt collection companies are small 
businesses. The debt collection workforce is ethnically diverse, and 70% of employees are women. 
 
I. Background about ACA International 
 
ACA International members play a critical role in protecting both consumers and lenders. ACA 
International members work with consumers to resolve consumers’ debts, which in turn saves every 
American household, on average, more than $700 year after year. The accounts receivable management 
(“ARM”) industry is instrumental in keeping America’s credit-based economy functioning with access 
to credit at the lowest possible cost, thereby protecting one of the safety nets of the most vulnerable 

 
 
consumers in society from unplanned expenses. For example, in 2018, the ARM industry returned over 
$90 billion to creditors for goods and services they had provided to their customers. And in turn, the 
ARM industry’s collections benefit all consumers by lowering the costs of goods and services—
especially when rising prices are impacting consumers’ quality of life throughout the country. 
 
ACA International members also follow comprehensive compliance policies and high ethical 
standards to ensure consumers are treated fairly. The Association contributes to this end goal by 
providing timely industry-sponsored education as well as compliance certifications. In short, ACA 
International members are committed to assisting consumers as they work together to resolve their 
financial obligations, all in accordance with the Collector’s Pledge1 that all consumers are treated with 
dignity and respect. ACA members serving medical providers support their work in a variety of ways, 
including by stepping into their shoes to collect owed debt and, in less common instances, by buying 
assets or litigating to enforce contractual obligations. 
 
II. Comments 
 
The CFPB has targeted the work of the ARM industry serving medical providers in several ways. 
One of the Bureau’s apparent objectives is to completely remove any reference to outstanding 
medical debts from all credit reports. In this RFI, the CFPB now takes aim at financial products used 
to pay for health care. Unfortunately, the CFPB has not engaged in meaningful conversations with 
stakeholders in the health care or debt collection markets beyond the targeted collection of anecdotal 
information from select groups. A good example of this is the recent July 11, 2023, CFPB Hearing on 
Medical Billing and Collections, where this RFI was discussed. The hearing included no medical 
providers, hospitals, or industry participants and instead included only a sounding board of 
government employees and consumer advocacy groups. 
 
As an overarching matter, ACA International does not believe the CFPB should take any actions 
related to limiting options for health care providers without robust and data-driven research proving 
that they will not harm the ability to access medical services or the ability to offer and be 
compensated for medical care provided. It is also far from clear that the CFPB has the authority to 
regulate medical providers in many of the ways it contemplates in this RFI, various press releases, 
and statements to Congress. 
 
Restrictions on the collection of validly owed debt cause the availability of credit to decrease. 
Additionally, credit is extended with the understanding that it will be paid back. While limiting 
accountability may seem to protect consumers, in reality, it leads to fewer credit extensions and 
higher interest rates on credit that is extended. In such circumstances, consumers may be forced to 
turn to unregulated products or, in the case of medical debt, not seek procedures or treatments that 
could be life-saving. ACA has previously extensively outlined the CFPB’s inability to rewrite the 
Fair Credit Reporting Act2 and the likely consequences of producing arbitrary decisions about 
medical debt. Accordingly, ACA International continues to remind the CFPB that Congress can make 
 
1 Collectors Pledge states that ACA members • believe every person has worth as an individual. • believe every person 
should be treated with dignity and respect. • will make it their responsibility to help consumers find ways to pay their just 
debts. • will be professional and ethical. • will commit to honoring this pledge. 
2 ACA Letter to CFPB in Response to NCLC Petition, available at https://policymakers.acainternational.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/11/aca-response-to-nclc-petition-cfpb-November2022-final.pdf (Nov. 23, 2022). 

 
 
major changes to the U.S. medical system if, through their elected officials, consumers ask them to 
do so. However, the CFPB should not on its own make arbitrary judgments in areas of questionable 
jurisdiction.  
 
Thank you for your attention and due consideration. Please let me know if you have any questions. 
 
 
Scott Purcell 
Chief Executive Officer 
On behalf of ACA International 
 
