 
 
4350 N. Fairfax Drive, Suite 650, Arlington, VA 22203   |   703.379.7755   |   dentaltradealliance.org 
September 7, 2023 
 
Submitted via www.regulations.gov 
 
Mr. Rohit Chopra 
Director 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
1700 G Street NW 
Washington, DC 20552 
 
Re: 
Written Submission 
Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products 
Docket No. CFPB-2023-0038  
 
Dear Director Chopra: 
 
We respectfully submit on behalf of the Dental Trade Alliance (“DTA”) the following 
written comments in response to docket no. CFPB-2023-0038, Request for Information 
Regarding Medical Payment Products, which seeks information on credit financing options 
offered for medical care.  For the following reasons, the DTA respectfully supports these types 
of credit products, such as those offered by CareCredit, as providing individuals different 
financing options when they access and pay for medical and dental care.     
 
The DTA is a member supported trade association, consisting of suppliers and service 
providers to the oral health profession. Our main goal is to improve the state of oral health care 
in the United States, and toward that goal the organization provides resources, knowledge-
sharing opportunities and advocacy that supports businesses throughout the United States, as 
well as the rest of the world.  DTA members manufacture and distribute essential, and in some 
cases life-supporting, medical devices and dental products, including personal protective 
equipment for fighting the COVID-19 pandemic.   
 
Public policy should be looking to improve access to oral healthcare by providing a 
variety of different payment options to patients who may not have insurance or the out-of-pocket 
financial means to otherwise obtain needed services.  By delaying routine oral health exams 
because of an inability to pay for it either by insurance or out-of-pocket, patients increase the risk 
that other, more serious oral conditions and diseases will go undetected.  A growing body of 

 
 
4350 N. Fairfax Drive, Suite 650, Arlington, VA 22203   |   703.379.7755   |   dentaltradealliance.org 
research has linked periodontal disease to several chronic diseases including diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease, and stroke.  Simply stated, public health is negatively impacted in the 
U.S. when U.S. citizens cancel or postpone their dentist appointments because of an inability to 
pay for it.   
 
The DTA understands the agency’s concern over the possible impact on some patients of 
deferred interest financing, but this option, as offered by CareCredit, is advantageous to those 
who pay off their balances during the promotional period, resulting in the forgiveness of all 
interest.  In this regard, the CareCredit option is more attractive to some patients who cannot 
pay out-of-pocket and who would be left resorting to their typical credit card, where no 
opportunity exists to delay payment and still avoid interest. 
 
Finally, concerns regarding predatory credit practices can be addressed through 
enhanced civil and criminal law enforcement against those who take advantage of their clients.  
Companies that play within the rules, and the patients that utilize those services, should not be 
penalized by this agency restricting or eliminating this type of financing option.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this important issue. Please contact us via 
email should you have questions regarding this request.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Greg Chavez  
 
 
 
 
Tim E. Rogan 
 
 
 
 
CEO  
 
 
 
 
 
Board Chair 
Dental Trade Alliance  
 
 
 
Dental Trade Alliance 
GregChavez@dentaltradealliance.org 
 
tim.rogan@pattersondental.com  
