 
 
September 11, 2023 
 
The Honorable Rohit Chopra 
Director  
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
 
The Honorable Chiquita Brooks-LaSure  
Administrator 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services  
 
The Honorable Thomas C. West Jr. 
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Domestic Business Tax, Office of Tax Policy 
U.S. Department of the Treasury 
 
 
Submitted Electronically 
 
RE: Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products 
 
Dear Director Chopra, Administrator Brooks-LaSure, and Deputy Assistant Secretary 
West: 
 
On behalf of the American Hospital Association’s (AHA) nearly 5,000 member hospitals, 
health systems and other health care organizations, and our clinician partners — 
including more than 270,000 affiliated physicians, 2 million nurses and other caregivers 
— and the 43,000 health care leaders who belong to our professional membership 
groups, we thank you for the opportunity to provide our perspective on certain financial 
products patients may use to pay for medical care (medical payment products).  
 
Hospitals and health systems are very concerned about patients’ medical debt. 
Hospitals are the only part of the health care sector that provide services to patients 
regardless of their ability to pay. In addition, they backstop that commitment by 
providing financial and other assistance for those who cannot pay — including helping 
patients qualify for federal and state health care programs, such as Medicaid and 
Medicaid. In doing so, patients can receive regular preventive care not just episodic 
care for serious injuries or illness. In addition, hospitals absorb billions of dollars of 
losses for patients who are unable to pay their bills, mainly due to inadequate 

The Honorables Chopra, Brooks-LaSure, and West 
September 11, 2023 
Page 2 of 11 
 
commercial insurance coverage; in 2020, the latest figure available, hospitals provided 
more than $42 billion in uncompensated care.1 
 
This is why hospitals are staunch supporters of ensuring everyone is enrolled in some 
form of comprehensive coverage and, when that coverage is inadequate, hospitals also 
provide tens of billions of dollars in uncompensated care annually. They deeply value 
and take seriously their duty to care for anyone who comes through their doors 
regardless of ability to pay and, indeed, are the only part of the health care system with 
such awesome responsibility.  
 
Unfortunately, major gaps in our health care coverage system leave patients exposed to 
costs they often cannot afford. The administration recently acknowledged this by 
allowing certain Medicare patients to pay for their prescription drugs over time.2 These 
gaps are caused by inadequate health insurance coverage, excessive cost-sharing 
requirements and an erosion of coverage caused by restrictions on covered benefits. 
These problems often require that patients, who do not qualify for financial assistance 
from the hospital at which they received care, look for alternate approaches to pay for 
their care. No commercial insurance company offers any program of which AHA is 
aware to help patients pay when the gaps in their coverage threaten to create medical 
debt. And the fact is that no matter how generous, hospital financial assistance 
programs cannot close the gap inadequate commercial insurance coverage creates. 
That is why patients must look for other options, including payment plans, loans and 
credit cards. 
 
The AHA is not an expert in the universe of financial products used to pay for medical 
care; however, our research and outreach suggests they are diverse, ranging from zero 
interest payment plans operated by a hospital or other provider to credit cards and loans 
sold by community-based lenders with no affiliation to a provider. We recognize that 
there is and should be a role for this agency to ensure that the commercial entities 
offering these financial products to patients are fair and transparent about the terms and 
conditions and abide by the hospital’s financial assistance commitment and obligations. 
However, until there is more done to address the gaps created by commercial health 
insurance, it would be unwise for this agency to impede access to financing products 
that meet reasonable consumer protection requirements and can help patients pay for 
the care they need. 
 
In the following comments, we aim to: 
• provide additional context on patients’ exposure to medical costs; 
 
 
1 https://www.aha.org/system/files/media/file/2020/01/2020-Uncompensated-Care-Fact-Sheet.pdf  
2 Seniors will be able to spread their out-of-pocket drug costs over 12 months under a new program recently 
announced by CMS, the latest effort by the Biden administration to address prescription drug costs. 
https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/cms-issues-draft-guidance-new-program-allow-people-medicare-pay-
out-pocket-prescription-drug-
costs#:~:text=By%20enabling%20seniors%20and%20people,of%2Dpocket%20prescription%20drug%20costs.  

The Honorables Chopra, Brooks-LaSure, and West 
September 11, 2023 
Page 3 of 11 
 
• provide insights into the universe of medical payment products as we 
understand it; and 
• provide considerations for policymakers and regulators interested in additional 
consumer protections in health care financing.  
 
Patients’ Exposure to Health Care Costs 
 
Every single instance in which a patient seeks a medical payment product is triggered 
by a need to pay out-of-pocket for some or all the cost of a health care service. Nearly 
all patients are responsible for paying some portion of their care out-of-pocket. In many 
instances, patients pay their medical bills without issue. However, there are three 
specific scenarios in which patients’ cost exposure may exceed their ability to pay, 
which may lead them to consider a medical payment product.  
• The first is if they are uninsured.  
• The second is if their health insurer subjects them to unaffordable cost-sharing 
requirements, making them effectively “underinsured.”  
• The third is when their insurer changes the rules of their coverage or denies 
medically-necessary care resulting in unexpected medical bills.  
 
We explore each of these further below. 
 
When individuals are uninsured, they are generally responsible for the entirety of their 
medical bills, though those with few resources are connected to coverage and/or may 
qualify for hospital financial assistance policies. While federal law requires hospitals to 
triage and stabilize any individual that presents to the emergency department, the 
government does not compensate hospitals for that care and does not prohibit hospitals 
from billing patients for the care they receive. While the rate of uninsurance is currently 
close to record low levels, there are still more than 25 million individuals who are not 
enrolled in comprehensive health insurance. In some states that have opted not to 
expand Medicaid, upwards of 18% of the population is uninsured.3 These numbers are 
expected to grow as states complete the eligibility redetermination process for Medicaid 
as part of the COVID-19 public health emergency unwinding.  
 
Insured individuals, in contrast, are generally responsible for paying a portion of their 
care out-of-pocket. Their cost-sharing is usually the result of some combination of 
copayments, deductibles and coinsurance established by their health insurer. While 
cost-sharing traditionally was seen as a way to reduce the risk of unnecessary 
utilization, insurers have increased the amounts of patient cost sharing to levels that far 
exceed what may be necessary to address that moral hazard.4 The increasing share of 
the costs being shouldered by patients has also had the unintended effect of 
 
 
3 https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/documents/e06a66dfc6f62afc8bb809038dfaebe4/Uninsured-Record-Low-
Q12023.pdf  
4 https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama-health-
forum/fullarticle/2783878#:~:text=The%20primary%20aim%20of%20cost,health%20care%20use%20to%20patients.  

The Honorables Chopra, Brooks-LaSure, and West 
September 11, 2023 
Page 4 of 11 
 
disincentivizing patients from seeking high-value care, such as preventive services, 
vaccines, or asthma medication, that are cost-effective and can be critical to maintaining 
health or preventing more severe and costly illness.5 Recent consumer polling found 
that 68% of patients feel they are paying too much for health care and believe insurance 
costs are the driver behind why those costs are too high.6 In addition, a majority of 
patients report their health insurance premiums being too expensive as part of their 
family budget, difficulty affording insurance or both. These results are confirmed by data 
on actual changes in health insurance benefit design. 
 
Patients face significantly higher cost-sharing today than they did just 5 to 10 years ago. 
According to the Kaiser Family Foundation’s 2022 Employer Health Benefits Survey, 
88% of workers had a plan with a deductible in 2022, up from 72% in 2012; the average 
general annual deductible for single coverage was $1,562, which is 95% higher than in 
2012.7 The same survey found that most patients with employer-sponsored coverage 
face a copayment for office visits (on average, $27 for primary care and $44 for 
specialty care), and the majority of plans require coinsurance for hospital admissions. 
Coinsurance is particularly challenging for patients to plan for as the amount, which is a 
percentage of the cost of services rendered, can only be determined after the course of 
care is complete and the final costs are known. 
 
The amount of cost-sharing required by health insurers is unaffordable for many 
patients. A recent Federal Reserve report on the economic well-being of U.S. 
households revealed that 37% of adults would not be able to afford a $400 emergency, 
an amount over which is $1,000 less than the average general annual deductible for 
single, employer-sponsored coverage.8 And yet, health insurers continue to foist more 
of the cost of coverage onto patients, and the federal government permits it by setting 
the annual limit on out-of-pocket costs for most individuals at $9,100 (for 2023). It 
should therefore be no surprise that the same Federal Reserve report found that 25% of 
adults reported skipping medical care due to an inability to pay, including 43% of adults 
who reported being in poor health.  
 
Challenges with cost-sharing are exacerbated for individuals and families enrolled in 
coverage products that do not need to meet the consumer protections that apply to 
most forms of comprehensive coverage. Specifically, short-term limited duration health 
plans and health sharing ministries can subject patients to even greater amounts of out-
of-pocket costs than individuals enrolled in comprehensive coverage. In a recent 
proposed rule, the departments of Treasury, Labor and Health and Human Services 
 
 
5 Gibson TB, Maclean RJ, Chernew ME, Fendrick AM, Baigel C. Value-based insurance design: Benefits beyond cost 
and utilization. Am J Manag Care. 2015;21(1):32-35. 
6 https://www.aha.org/infographics/2023-07-11-new-consumer-poll-finds-patients-are-concerned-about-commercial-
insurer-barriers-care-infographic  
7 https://files.kff.org/attachment/Report-Employer-Health-Benefits-2022-Annual-Survey.pdf  
8 https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/2020-economic-well-being-of-us-households-in-2019-dealing-with-
unexpected-expenses.htm  

The Honorables Chopra, Brooks-LaSure, and West 
September 11, 2023 
Page 5 of 11 
 
specifically called out the role of short-term limited duration health plans increasing the 
“risk of high out-of-pocket health expenses and medical debt.”9 
 
Cost sharing, however, is not the only way in which insurers offload more of the cost of 
care onto patients. Insurers increasing are scaling back the scope of their coverage 
even for medically-necessary care. They do this through coverage rules that restrict 
which services will be covered and where, and they often implement these coverage 
changes midyear when the patient does not have the option of switching plans. Recent 
examples of this include midyear restrictions on coverage for specialty drugs,10 
outpatient surgeries11 and diagnostics,12 as well as excessive use of prior authorization 
and inappropriate coverage denials. In other cases, insurers inappropriately deny 
covered services that meet coverage and billing rules, as was observed by the Office of 
the Inspector General for the Department of Health and Human Services (OIG-HHS) in 
their April 2022 report on Medicare Advantage denials. Patients who experience denials 
because of these coverage changes or inappropriate denials can be subject to 
unexpected medical bills. These unexpected bills, in turn, can disincentivize patients to 
seek care when they need it. Unexpected denials also make it difficult for patients to 
plan for medical expenses when medically necessary covered services are adjudicated 
and denied by their insurer sometimes months or years after the care was received. The 
same consumer polling referenced above found that 62% of patients report their 
household has experienced at least one insurance coverage-related barrier in the past 
two years; 43% of those patients report their health has gotten worse as a result.13 
 
Below are several recent findings of how some health insurers inappropriately deny 
patient care, which can significantly impact patients’ costs, including when frustrated 
patients eschew their coverage and solicit care on a self-pay basis. 
 
• An analysis of government-reported data by the Kaiser Family Foundation found 
that “across HealthCare.gov insurers with complete data, nearly 17% of in-
network claims were denied in 2021. Insurer denial rates varied widely around 
this average, ranging from 2% to 49%.”14 
• The aforementioned April 2022 HHS-OIG report found that 13% of Medicare 
Advantage Organization (MAO) prior authorization denials and 18% of claims 
denials were inappropriate, raising “concerns about beneficiary access to 
medically necessary care.”15 
 
 
9 https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2023-07-12/pdf/2023-14238.pdf  
10 https://static.cigna.com/assets/chcp/resourceLibrary/medicalResourcesList/medicalPlansAndProduct/cigna-
specialty-pathwell-network.html  
11 https://www.uhcprovider.com/content/dam/provider/docs/public/policies/medicaid-comm-plan/outpatient-surg-
procedures-site-service-cs.pdf  
12 https://www.uhcprovider.com/content/dam/provider/docs/public/policies/comm-medical-drug/screening-
colonoscopy-procedures-site-service.pdf  
13 https://www.aha.org/infographics/2023-07-11-new-consumer-poll-finds-patients-are-concerned-about-commercial-
insurer-barriers-care-infographic  
14 https://www.kff.org/private-insurance/issue-brief/claims-denials-and-appeals-in-aca-marketplace-plans/  
15 https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/OEI-09-18-00260.pdf  

The Honorables Chopra, Brooks-LaSure, and West 
September 11, 2023 
Page 6 of 11 
 
• The OIG HHS found that many MAO prior authorization and payment denials 
were inappropriate, as evidenced by MAOs overturning 75% of their own denials 
raising “concerns that some Medicare Advantage beneficiaries and providers 
were initially denied services and payments that should have been provided. 
This is especially concerning because beneficiaries and providers rarely used 
the appeals process, which is designed to ensure access to care and 
payment.”16 
• The OIG HHS recently found that Medicaid managed care plans deny a high 
rate — one out of every eight — of prior authorization requests, and some plans 
had “prior authorization denial rates greater than 25 percent—twice the overall 
rate.”17 
 
Coverage has also grown more confusing in ways that can expose patients to greater 
costs. Much of this confusion is due to increasingly complex insurance designs that are 
not transparent to patients, such as what is covered pre-deductible, the interaction 
between point-of-service copays, coinsurance and deductibles, and poor 
communication and education by a patient’s insurer. For example, a recent National 
Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) report found significant gaps and 
inconsistencies with the way that insurers share information about pre-deductible, no 
cost-sharing preventive services with their members, resulting in a “meaningful barrier 
to effective understanding and use of preventive service benefits.”18  
 
The combination of high rates of uninsurance, increasing patient cost-sharing 
requirements, inappropriate coverage denials and patient confusion over their coverage 
makes it hard for patients to plan and subsequently pay for their care. Gaps in 
coverage, due to uninsurance and underinsurance, may force patients to turn to other 
tools to help finance their care, including various medical payment products.  
 
Role of Financial Assistance and Medical Payment Products 
 
Patients have several options for paying for their portion of the cost of their care. They 
can pay their bills immediately using their preferred approach; they can apply for 
financial assistance; or they can look to a medical-specific financing option, such as a 
payment plan, a medical loan or a medical credit card.19 Hospitals and other providers 
may only be privy to certain details of these arrangements. For example, if a patient 
elects to pay for their care with a standard credit card, the hospital is generally not 
 
 
16 https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-09-16-00410.pdf  
17 https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/OEI-09-19-00350.pdf  
18 https://healthyfuturega.org/ghf_resource/preventive-services-coverage-and-cost-sharing-protections-are-
inconsistently-and-inequitably-implemented/  
19 It is worth noting that unless a patient alerts the hospital to financial concerns, use of a standard credit card does 
not necessarily suggest to hospitals that a patient is experiencing financial challenges. Indeed, many patients may 
elect to pay all types of bills via credit cards for reasons that have nothing to do with a need for financing, such as the 
ability to track purchases, the security credit cards offer over cash, or the accumulation of points/benefits the card 
may offer. In addition, like many industries, not all providers accept cash payment. 

The Honorables Chopra, Brooks-LaSure, and West 
September 11, 2023 
Page 7 of 11 
 
aware of or involved in the terms of the agreement between the patient and the lender. 
This also can be the case with medical-specific payment products that are sold in the 
community. Below, we further discuss hospital financial assistance programs and 
medical payment products. 
 
Hospital Financial Assistance Programs 
 
If a patient alerts a hospital to the need for assistance with their bill, they will be 
assessed first for eligibility for both health care coverage and for financial assistance 
(whether the individuals is uninsured or underinsured). While financial assistance 
policies are required for tax-exempt hospitals, all full-service hospitals offer financial 
assistance. Hospitals tailor these policies to both meet the needs of their communities, 
as well as ensure that the hospital can absorb the expense of these policies without 
sacrificing access to care in the community. As such, there can be variation in hospital 
policies. However, the AHA has a long history of promoting voluntary patient billing 
guidelines that carefully balance those interests.20 The billing guidelines encourage 
hospitals to provide care at no cost for individuals below 200% of the poverty level and 
at a discounted rate for individuals up to a certain amount of income and assets that 
makes sense for their community. Tax-exempt (as well as most, if not all, for-profit) 
hospitals inform patients about the availability of financial assistance in a variety of 
ways, including directly with the patient, conspicuous notices in the admissions area 
and the emergency room, through the hospital website, upon request, through various 
community channels that focus on those most likely to be in need, and in the bill. 
 
Indeed, the Internal Revenue Service’s (IRS) 501(r) regulations require that tax-exempt 
hospitals adhere to a number of patient-centered practices. Tax-exempt hospitals must: 
 
• Limit Extraordinary Collection Actions (ECAs): 501(r) regulations mandate 
that tax-exempt hospitals must make reasonable efforts to determine whether a 
patient is eligible for financial assistance before engaging in ECAs, such as filing 
liens, wage garnishments, or reporting unpaid debts to credit agencies. This 
helps protect vulnerable patients from aggressive collection tactics. 
• Notify Patients of Financial Assistance Policies: Tax-exempt hospitals are 
required to clearly communicate their financial assistance policies to patients. 
This includes providing written notice about the availability of financial assistance 
and the application process. This transparency helps patients understand their 
options and rights. 
• Adhere to Fair Billing and Collection Practices: 501(r) regulations stress the 
importance of billing patients in a clear, concise, and understandable manner. 
Bills should include essential information about the services provided, the 
charges incurred, and any financial assistance available. Hospitals must also 
provide patients with plain-language summaries of their bills. 
 
 
20 https://www.aha.org/standardsguidelines/2020-10-15-patient-billing-guidelines  

The Honorables Chopra, Brooks-LaSure, and West 
September 11, 2023 
Page 8 of 11 
 
• Charge Reasonable Billing Amounts: The regulations specify that the 
amounts charged to patients eligible for financial assistance must be limited to 
what would be billed to an individual with insurance. This prevents uninsured 
and underinsured patients from facing exorbitant charges. 
• Not Discriminate: Tax-exempt hospitals are prohibited from discriminating 
against patients based on race, ethnicity, or other protected characteristics. This 
ensures that all patients are treated fairly and without bias. 
• Use Plain Language Communications: The regulations emphasize using plain 
language in all communications with patients, including financial assistance 
policies, billing statements, and collection notices. This helps ensure that 
patients can understand their rights and responsibilities. 
• Conduct a Community Health Needs Assessment (CHNA): Tax-exempt 
hospitals must conduct a CHNA every three years to identify and address the 
health needs of their communities. This process involves soliciting input from the 
community, including patients, to better align services with community needs. 
 
In summary, 501(r) regulations provide a regulatory framework that encourages tax-
exempt hospitals to adopt patient-centered collection practices by promoting 
transparency, limiting aggressive collection actions, and ensuring that patients are 
aware of their rights and available financial assistance options. These regulations aim to 
strike a balance between hospitals' financial sustainability and fair treatment of patients, 
especially those who are vulnerable or facing financial hardship. And while these 
regulations only apply to tax-exempt hospitals, many, if not most, other hospitals also 
follow similar practices. 
 
Medical Payment Products 
 
Patients may have other options for financing their care if they do not qualify for 
financial assistance. Many hospitals offer payment plans — something that patients 
themselves have requested according to input from our members, as well as consumer 
research.21 In addition, some hospitals may either directly offer loans or make referrals 
to different payment products offered by independent third parties. Separately, and not 
uncommonly, patients may find their own independent financing within the community, 
such as through a personal loan or medical credit card. Hospitals generally have no way 
of knowing if a patient has obtained a personal loan or credit card to finance their care 
and are not subject to the terms of those arrangements.  
 
Notably, hospitals report seeing an increase in community-based financing products. 
We have heard instances of patients requesting that hospitals allow them to use 
medical credit cards that were sold to them in veterinary offices or when they were 
paying for retail medical services, such as cosmetic surgery. Again, hospitals are aware 
of these products but not privy to the agreements between the vendors selling them and 
 
 
21 https://www.flywire.com/resources/survey-patients-prefer-payment-plans-as-payment-option  

The Honorables Chopra, Brooks-LaSure, and West 
September 11, 2023 
Page 9 of 11 
 
the patients purchasing them. They also have no knowledge or ability to intervene in 
any consequences should patients default on them. Therefore, it is entirely possible that 
a patient may be sent to collections for medical debt they held on one of these 
community-based loans without any awareness by the provider.  
 
Considerations for Policymakers 
 
We appreciate the agency’s attention to potentially concerning medical payment 
products, especially considering Americans’ high exposure to financial strain and debt. 
In the first quarter of 2023, household debt in America rose to $17.05 trillion, 
representing a precipitous increase over the last decade.22 In part, rising debt can be 
attributed to cost growth outpacing income growth which requires many Americans to 
borrow more to pay for a wide range of goods and services, including housing, higher 
education and consumer goods. For example, one study found that college costs have 
increased by almost 170% since 1980, while the average earnings for young adults 
aged 22-27 have increased only by 19%.23 Middle class Americans are shouldering 
much of this debt, and many are living paycheck to paycheck. Medical debt, a 
consequence of patients not paying some or all their health care bills, is one type of 
debt held by many Americans, and some of that debt may be held in the types of 
medical payment products described in the RFI. 
 
We strongly recommend tackling the root causes that lead patients to seek 
medical payment products: reducing patient exposure to unaffordable health care 
costs. This would best be achieved by ensuring all individuals are enrolled in 
some form of comprehensive health care coverage with affordable cost-sharing. 
Such an approach would not only minimize the need for medical payment products 
(therefore limiting the risk of potentially predatory products), but it would provide 
innumerable other benefits to patients, communities and providers.24 Specifically, 
coverage is associated with improved patient access to care, improved health 
outcomes, appropriate health care utilization, improved ability of individuals to 
participate in the workforce, and reduced incidence of both violent and property crime, 
among other individual and community benefits. 
 
The following are six concrete ideas to prevent patients from experiencing unaffordable 
costs for their care. 
 
• Continue efforts to ensure every individual is enrolled in some form of 
comprehensive health care coverage with a particular focus on connecting 
 
 
22 https://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/hhdc  
23 https://www.cnbc.com/2021/11/02/the-gap-in-college-costs-and-earnings-for-young-workers-since-1980  
24 https://www.aha.org/guidesreports/report-importance-health-
coverage#:~:text=Studies%20confirm%20that%20coverage%20improves,on%20individuals%2C%20families%20and
%20communities.  

The Honorables Chopra, Brooks-LaSure, and West 
September 11, 2023 
Page 10 of 11 
 
people to existing coverage options for which they may be eligible, as well 
as expanding Medicaid in every state. 
• Remove providers from the collection of cost-sharing altogether by 
requiring health insurers, which are the entity determining how much 
patients must pay, to directly collect the cost-sharing amounts they 
impose. This approach would eliminate most patient bills from providers 
altogether.  
• Restrict the sale of high-deductible health plans to only those individuals 
with demonstrated means to afford the associated cost-sharing. 
• Prohibit the sale of health sharing ministry products and short-term, 
limited-duration plans that offer coverage for longer than 90 days.25 These 
products frequently leave patients exposed to medical bills they expected would 
have been covered and generally lack consumer protections. 
• Lower the maximum out-of-pocket cost limits that apply in most forms of 
health care coverage and establish such limits where they do not exist 
today. As previously noted, individuals in many health insurance plans face up 
to $9,100 in total annual cost sharing. For Medicare beneficiaries without any 
supplemental coverage, there is no limit on how much they may need to pay in 
cost-sharing. Capping out-of-pocket costs at more reasonable amounts, 
especially for lower to middle income individuals and families, would significantly 
reduce the need for medical payment products. 
• Hold the health insurers accountable to providing a full and robust 
eligibility information via the 270/271 response for the HIPAA transaction 
set. The lack of or limited information provided by the plans electronically makes 
it difficult for hospitals to provide true patient transparency and the development 
of sound cost estimates for patients. Electronic health insurer responses often 
do not provide benefit limitations (what is/is not a covered benefit) or the copays 
and benefits for certain service codes despite the mechanism for doing so 
already existing. 
 
With respect to the inquiries related to tax-exempt hospitals and the selling of medical 
debt, the RFI explains the requirements for tax-exempt hospitals, which are 
comprehensive. Specifically, in order to sell medical debt, hospitals must enter into a 
legally binding contract with the buyer that: 
1. prohibits extraordinary collection actions;  
2. limits interest to that allowed under treasury regulations, currently 7%;  
3. assures the debt is recallable if the patient subsequently qualifies for financial 
assistance; and  
 
 
25 The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services recently issued a notice of proposed rulemaking to limit short-term 
limited duration health plans to no more than four months, which we support. See: 
https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/fact-sheets/short-term-limited-duration-insurance-independent-noncoordinated-
excepted-benefits-coverage-level  

The Honorables Chopra, Brooks-LaSure, and West 
September 11, 2023 
Page 11 of 11 
 
4. should the debt not be recalled, limits repayment to the amount the patient 
would have paid under the hospital’s financial assistance policy. 
 
These requirements are designed to protect patients who do not qualify for financial 
assistance at the time care is delivered but do so before the debt is satisfied. Any 
concerns about applying these consumer protections more broadly for other types of 
financial products patients may use to pay their debt should be directed to the financial 
firms that offer those products. Ensuring the financial payment products are adequately 
disclosed and fairly administered is well within the agency’s responsibility and should be 
the focus of its efforts. Hospitals are at a disadvantage where the agency is not in 
ensuring these sensible consumer protection measures are required of the financial 
firms that make these products available. As discussed above, patients may acquire 
these products in many different venues outside the control of the hospital, e.g., 
veterinary offices, doctor’s offices and clinics. Imposing obligations solely on hospitals, 
which are concerned about patient debt and already aiding those most in need, and not 
on the financial industry more generally would be neither prudent nor effective in 
addressing the issue about which the agency is concerned.  
 
We appreciate your consideration of these issues. Please contact me if you have 
questions or feel free to have a member of your team contact Molly Smith, AHA’s group 
vice president for public policy, at mollysmith@aha.org.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
/s/ 
 
Ashley Thompson 
Senior Vice President 
Public Policy Analysis and Development 
 
  
