 
 
 
MISSION  
As the leading voice for Hispanic Oral Health, we provide service, education-research, advocacy, and leadership 
 for all healthcare professionals to promote overall health of the Hispanic/Latinx and other underrepresented 
communities. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Talon Court 
Sewell, NJ  08080 
Phone: (856) 353-9459 
www.hdassoc.org 
 
 
OFFICERS 
 
 
 
 
President 
Christina Meiners, DDS 
San Antonio, TX 
 
Immediate Past President 
Mercedes Mota-Martínez, DDS 
 
New York, Ny 
 
 
 
 
 
 
President-Elect 
Martha Mutis, DDS, MPH 
New York, NY 
 
Treasurer 
Ana Keohane, DDS 
Newton, MA 
 
Secretary 
Yanina Jouzy, DDS 
San Dimas, CA 
 
Trustees 
Luis C. Yepes, DDS (TX) 
Michelle Aguilos Thompson DDS, (TX) 
 
 
Student Trustee 
Sylvette Ramos Diaz DS-4 
Snow Camp, NC 
 
 
Membership & Operations 
Coordinator 
Executive Director & CEO 
Manuel A. Cordero, DDS, CPH, MAGD  
Sewell, NJ 
 
 
 
 
 
        Email Link: MedicalDebtRFI_2023@cfpb.gov 
 
 
 
Date 8-25-2023 
      Subject Line: Docket No. CFPB–2023–0038 
      Salutation: Director Chopra, 
The Hispanic Dental Association (“HDA”) is pleased to submit these comments in response to the 
Request for Information issued by the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of 
Treasury, and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (the “Agencies”) (“RFI”). HDA is the leading voice 
for Hispanic Oral Health, providing service, education-research, advocacy, and leadership for all healthcare 
professionals to promote the overall health of the Hispanic/Latinx and underrepresented communities.  
We are driven by our vision to empower healthcare professionals to increase oral health equity and 
improve health care quality in the Hispanic/Latinx and underrepresented populations.1 
It is the HDA’s mission to promote the overall health of the Hispanic/Latinx and other 
underrepresented communities, and we offer these comments with that in mind.  Our members strongly 
support the goal of ensuring fair treatment to our patients, both by health care providers as well as by 
financial services providers.  We generally believe these objectives are being met, at least as it relates to 
the patients our members see on a daily basis.  With that in mind, we are concerned that the RFI suggests 
that providers, like dentists, habitually provide poor service to their patients as it relates to treatment, 
billing, insurance, and payments.  This is, of course, not the case as it relates to our members.  Dentistry is 
a word-of-mouth business, if you will pardon the pun, and it is not difficult for patients to leave a bad 
practice.  A dentist who treats his or her patients poorly is not likely to be a successful dentist.  To the 
extent the Agencies believe that there are improvements that can be made in the marketplace, the HDA 
stands ready to assist.  However, the apparent assumption that there are material deficiencies with how 
our members treat their patients, including how they may make financing options available, is not 
accurate. 
We also want to note that the RFI recognizes that dentists are part of a larger medical 
community providing essential medical services.  HDA strongly agrees with the Agencies on this point.  We 
believe that dentists’ status as medical providers providing critical care has been true since the outset of 
the profession.  This is an important fact because as to the government’s response to the COVID pandemic, 
one or more of the Agencies did not recognize the dental profession as providing essential or medical 
services. The government agencies in charge of healthcare missed the importance of oral healthcare 
providers in the management of the Covid Pandemic. But the deputy Surgeon General, who is the highest-
ranking oral Healthcare officer of our Government reach out to oral healthcare leaders and stakeholder 
along with key head of healthcare to coordinate efforts to collaborate and support the healthcare efforts 
which at the time needed our extra input and support. It was thanks to this initiative that Dentist started 
helping in the vaccination process that at first was not allowed due to misinformation by the US 
Healthcare branches. Because of this type of mishandling, although with good intentions, it concerns the 
Hispanic Dental Association that our communities would be negatively affected by your initiatives to 
interfere with one of the most innovative and powerful financial tools our members use to fight inequities 
in healthcare. Regardless, we are pleased to see that the Agencies appropriately deem dental care to be 
medical care. 
Turning more to the substance of the RFI, our experience indicates that consumers greatly 
appreciate the ability to use credit when paying for dental care.  This is true regardless of whether 
payment is made with a Visa or Mastercard, or with a product like CareCredit.  There are a variety of 
dental needs our patients have that may not be covered by insurance but are strongly desired and or 
needed.  Many patients could not afford the care if they had to pay by cash or check out-of-pocket.  For 
those consumers who are looking at their financial options, we are pleased that many of our members can 
suggest credit options like CareCredit.  There is no question that products like CareCredit make dental care 
more affordable and more available to more of our members’ patients.  We can say with certainty that 
many of our members’ patients would not be able to obtain appropriate dental care without access to 
CareCredit.  In fact, our members’ ability to offer access to various credit products aligns perfectly with our 
vision of increasing oral health equity and improving health care quality in the Hispanic/Latinx and other 
underrepresented communities.  Without access to credit, including CareCredit, access to dental care 
suffers. 
We urge the Agencies to consider the benefits our members’ patients receive when they can 
access credit.  HDA strongly believes that the cause of oral health equity is advanced through the use of 
CareCredit. 
Sincerely, 
 
Executive Director & Chief executive Officer 
Hispanic Dental Association   
