 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 11, 2023 
Via Electronic Submission Only: 
www.regulations.gov 
 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau  
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services  
Department of the Treasury 
 
Re: 
Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products   
Docket Numbers CFPB–2023–0038; CMS–2023–0106; TREAS–DO–2023–0008 
 
The undersigned organizations submit these comments in response to the above-
referenced Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products (RFI). We represent a 
diverse coalition of advocacy organizations that share a commitment to improving health care.  
 
We thank the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), Health and Human 
Services (HHS), Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), and Department of the 
Treasury (Treasury) (collectively, the “Agencies”) for their attention to medical payment 
products. As you know, these products can increase medical debt for the most financially 
vulnerable patients and contribute to deep health inequities in our current health system. We 
applaud the Agencies’ thoughtful questions and coordinated approach to this issue and request 
that the Agencies continue to collaborate to also address the underlying causes that leave many 
patients with medical debt.  
 
In this response, we ask that the CFPB: (1) prohibit the offering and promotion of 
deferred interest credit cards in health care settings; and (2) ban the inclusion of all medical debt 
on credit reports. We ask that HHS: (1) enact Conditions of Participation to reduce hospital debt 
and prohibit the most harmful collection actions by hospitals; and (2) address high rates of 
denials by private insurance companies and by Medicaid managed care organizations (Medicaid 
MCOs). Finally, we ask that Treasury: (1) strengthen and enforce current regulations for 
nonprofit hospitals relating to financial assistance policies and collection actions; and (2) 
reinstate previous guidance requiring nonprofit hospitals to provide charity care.  
 
General Questions 
 
1. What are the benefits, costs, and risks of medical payment products for consumers, 
health care providers, and companies offering these products? 
   
a. Overview 
 
Medical payment products carry financial risks for many patients. These products can 
increase the amount of medical debt that patients hold through high interest rates. Further, 
medical payment products may be used in place of financial assistance or traditional interest-free 
payment plans with the provider. Ultimately, these products may exacerbate existing inequalities 
in medical debt.  
 

 
2 
Undoubtedly, medical payment products also provide benefits. For instance, these 
products reduce administrative hassles for providers, such as handling insurance denials or 
administering payment plans. Medical payment products also help some patients to access care 
that they could not otherwise afford. Overall, however, we believe that the underlying issues 
making health care unaffordable should be addressed by federal action, not financing products.  
 
b. Deferred Interest Medical Credit Cards  
 
For deferred interest medical credit cards, the harms outweigh the benefits. Deferred 
interest medical credit cards pose financial risks to patients, particularly those who are already 
financially vulnerable. Deferred interest credit cards offer significant benefits to providers, 
however, which incentivizes providers to promote these products instead of offering financial 
assistance to patients. We urge the CFPB to prohibit the offering and promotion of deferred 
interest credit cards in health care settings.  
 
Deferred interest credit cards pose the following risks to patients: 
 
1. Deferred interest charges. If patients do not pay the full balance by the end of the 
promotional period, they incur interest dating back to the purchase date, including interest 
on amounts that have already been paid off.  
 
2. High interest rates. The average deferred interest credit card carries a higher interest rate 
than the average general purpose credit card.1 
 
3. Harm to credit scores. Even a single late or missed payment on a credit card may 
adversely impact the patient’s credit score within 30 days.2 Nonprofit hospitals may not 
make adverse credit reports until at least 120 days after the initial billing statement,3 and 
the three largest consumer credit reporting agencies have voluntarily agreed to wait one 
year before reporting, as well as removed medical debt under $500 from credit reports.4 
However, patients lose these protections when they put medical bills on credit cards as it 
is then treated as any other form of debt and not medical debt.   
 
4. Loss of opportunities for payment plans or financial assistance. Traditionally, providers 
have offered interest-free payment plans or financial assistance to patients who could not 
 
1 CFPB, Prepared Remarks of Director Rohit Chopra for the CFPB Hearing on Medical Billing and Collections, July 
11, 2023 (“The typical medical credit card has an interest rate of 27 percent — substantially higher than the 16 
percent average for general purpose credit cards.”), https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/prepared-
remarks-of-director-rohit-chopra-for-the-cfpb-hearing-on-medical-billing-and-collections/.  
2 Equifax, “When Does a Late Credit Card Payment Show Up on Credit Reports?” 
https://www.equifax.com/personal/education/credit-cards/when-late-credit-card-payments-post/ (accessed Aug. 10, 
2023).  
3 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(r)-6(c)(3)(i). 
4 CFPB, “Have medical debt? Anything already paid or under $500 should no longer be on your credit report,” May 
8, 2023 (noting that the voluntary removal of medical debt under $500 does not include medical expenses on credit 
cards), https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/blog/medical-debt-anything-already-paid-or-under-500-should-
no-longer-be-on-your-credit-report/.  

 
3 
afford the full payment at once. However, patients lose these options when they put the 
entire payment on a medical credit card. 
 
5. Less opportunity to correct billing errors. Medical billing errors are common. For 
instance, some estimate that 80 percent of medical bills contain an error.5 When patients 
put medical bills on a credit card, however, they can no longer resolve billing errors by 
calling their provider directly.6 Instead, patients must initiate a dispute with a credit card 
company in order to correct the bill.7 Indeed, Synchrony Bank appears to have disclaimed 
any responsibility for assisting patients with improper charges or amounts that should 
have been billed to an insurer, noting: “[I]t is up to the hospital to determine how best to 
bill for care, and how much to bill for care.”8 
 
6. Less likelihood of using retroactive Medicaid to pay for care. Patients who qualify for 
Medicaid are generally eligible for up to three months of retroactive coverage.9 When 
patients have already signed up for a medical credit card, however, they may be less 
likely to use their retroactive Medicaid coverage because the cost of care has already 
been financed.   
 
Providers have an incentive to offer medical credit cards rather than payment 
arrangements that would be more beneficial to the patient. Specifically, medical credit cards 
provide the following benefits for providers: 
 
1. Prompt payment and no risk from patient default. For instance, CareCredit offers an 
attractive financing solution for health and dental providers because it reimburses the 
provider within two days.10 CareCredit assumes the full risk of the patient’s delay or 
default in payment.11 In contrast, health care providers have traditionally offered long-
term payment plans when patients cannot afford the cost of their treatment.12 These 
payment plans generally do not include interest, and the provider’s office assumes the 
risk of the patient not paying the full cost for treatment already rendered.13 
 
2. Payment of full charges.  Providers have an incentive to steer patients to medical credit 
cards rather than offering financial assistance. For instance, three Senators recently raised 
concerns that: (1) patients who use medical credit cards may be paying the 
 
5 Modern Healthcare, “Identifying & Addressing Common Medical Billing Errors Pre- & Post-Payment,” Aug. 29, 
2019, https://www.modernhealthcare.com/finance/identifying-addressing-common-medical-billing-errors-pre-post-
payment.  
6 CFPB, “What should I know about medical credit cards and payment plans for medical bills?” May 28, 2023, 
https://www.consumerfinance.gov/ask-cfpb/what-should-i-know-about-medical-credit-cards-and-payment-plans-for-
medical-bills-en-1827/.  
7 Id.  
8 Synchrony Bank letter to Senators, at 2, Jan. 26, 2023, 
https://www.warren.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Medical%20Credit%20Card%20Companies%20Responses.pdf.  
9 42 CFR § 435.915.  
10 https://www.carecredit.com/providers/how-it-works/.  
11 Id.  
12 Allison J. Zimmon, “Rx for Costly Credit: Deferred Interest Medical Credit Cards Do More Harm Than Good,” 
35 B.C. J.L. & Soc. Just. 319, 326 (2015). 
13 Id.  

 
4 
“chargemaster” rates for services (list prices that virtually no payor reimburses); and (2) 
patients might be offered financing even if they would otherwise qualify for financial 
assistance.14 The response of Synchrony Bank, which owns CareCredit, indicates that its 
provider agreements do not offer any specific protections against these risks.15  
 
3. Avoid insurance hassles. Medical credit cards like CareCredit appear to reimburse 
providers without requiring prior authorization, documentation of medical necessity, or 
evidence of the appropriateness of charges.16 This makes these products more convenient 
than insurance coverage.  
 
a. In particular, providers may prefer CareCredit or other medical credit card 
financing to Medicaid reimbursement rates, which are “notably low.”17 Indeed, 
news articles have documented cases of dentists in California steering Medicaid 
patients to CareCredit cards instead of submitting claims to Medicaid.18 California 
responded by prohibiting health and dental providers from submitting applications 
for deferred interest credit cards on behalf of their patients.19 To protect patients 
in all states, the CFPB should do the same.  
 
b. Further, some insurers frequently deny claims. In 2021, one marketplace insurer 
denied 49 percent of in-network claims.20 Notably, the Office of Inspector 
General (OIG) for HHS recently raised concerns about high rates of prior 
authorization denials by Medicaid MCOs, some of which denied more than 25 
percent of prior authorization requests.21  
 
2. What are the terms of medical payment products, including interest rates 
and fees?  
 
Many deferred interest medical credit cards carry significant annual percentage rates 
(APRs). For instance, after the promotional period, the CareCredit deferred interest credit card 
has an annual percentage rate (APR) of about 27 percent.22 As the CFPB has noted, patients who 
 
14 Letter from Sen. Elizabeth Warren, Edward Markey, and Sanders to Synchrony Financial and Wells Fargo, at p. 2, 
Dec. 29, 2022, 
https://www.warren.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/2023.06.29%20Letter%20to%20CFPB%20re%20medical%20credit
%20cards1.pdf.  
15 Synchrony Bank letter to Senators, Appendix: responses to questions 2 and 16, Jan. 26, 2023, 
https://www.warren.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Medical%20Credit%20Card%20Companies%20Responses.pdf. 
16 https://www.carecredit.com/providers/how-it-works/. 
17 Commonwealth Fund, “Medicaid Reimbursement Rates Are A Racial Justice Issue,” June 16, 2022.   
18 The Sacramento Bee, “Dental Patients Face Years of Debt, Inflated Bills with ‘Out-of-Pocket’ Credit Cards,” Dec. 
9, 2019; see also Cal Matters, “Californians fall prey to high interest credit card loans while in exam chairs. Hereʼs a 
fix,” July 8, 2019.  
19 Id.  
20 KFF, “Claims Denials and Appeals in ACA Marketplace Plans in 2021,” https://www.kff.org/private-
insurance/issue-brief/claims-denials-and-appeals-in-aca-marketplace-plans/.  
21 HHS OIG, “High Rates of Prior Authorization Denials by Some Plans and Limited State Oversight Raise 
Concerns About Access to Care in Medicaid Managed Care,” OEI-09-19-00350, July 2023, 
https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/OEI-09-19-00350.pdf.  
22 https://www.carecredit.com/howcarecreditworks/prospective/.  

 
5 
are assessed interest on purchases with a deferred interest financing product pay, on average, an 
additional 23 percent of the purchase price.23  
 
As discussed above, providers have traditionally offered zero-interest payment plans to 
patients who cannot afford the entire cost at once. This is significantly more beneficial to patients 
who are struggling to afford care. If patients must use a credit card, they are better off using a 
general-purpose credit card, which usually carries a lower APR24 and does not result in 
unexpected deferred interest charges.  
 
Finally, while we appreciate the Agencies’ thorough and collaborative approach to 
gathering information on these products, we respectfully submit that the CFPB already has 
sufficient information to take action on deferred interest medical credit cards.  In May 2023, the 
CFPB released a comprehensive report on medical financing products, which included an 
appendix that lists the terms for many medical credit cards.25 The CFPB has ample authority and 
evidence to enact a prohibition on the promotion and offering of deferred interest medical credit 
cards in health care settings.26  
 
3. What are the health equity impacts of medical payment products and related billing 
and collection policies and practices?   
 
Medical debt disproportionately impacts women and historically marginalized 
communities, which exacerbates existing inequalities.  For instance, Black and Latino 
individuals are more likely to carry medical debt.27 Black individuals are more likely to be 
contacted by debt collectors.28 Further, Black individuals are more likely to be sued for medical 
debt.29 Significantly, 60 percent of women face financial hardship in the peripartum period.30 It 
is important to note that medical debt also limits important life options, such as the ability to 
purchase a home, pursue higher education, or even to access food and needed medical care.   
 
 
23 CFPB, “Medical Credit Cards and Financing Plans,” at 16, May 2023, 
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_medical-credit-cards-and-financing-plans_2023-05.pdf.  
24 CFPB, Prepared Remarks of Director Rohit Chopra for the CFPB Hearing on Medical Billing and Collections, 
July 11, 2023 (“The typical medical credit card has an interest rate of 27 percent — substantially higher than the 16 
percent average for general purpose credit cards.”), https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/prepared-
remarks-of-director-rohit-chopra-for-the-cfpb-hearing-on-medical-billing-and-collections/.  
25 CFPB, “Medical Credit Cards and Financing Plans,” at 18-20, May 2023, 
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_medical-credit-cards-and-financing-plans_2023-05.pdf. 
26 15 U.S.C. § 1637(j) (prohibiting double-cycle billing); 15 U.S. Code § 1666i–1 (prohibiting retroactive rate 
increases); see generally National Consumer Law Center, “Deceptive Bargain: The Hidden Time Bomb of Deferred 
Interest Credit Cards,” 18-20, https://www.nclc.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/report-deferred-interest.pdf. 
27 CFPB, “Medical Debt Burden in the United States,” at 3, February 2022, 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_medical-debt-burden-in-the-united-
states_report_2022-03.pdf.  
28 Financial Industry Regulator Authority (FINRA), National Financial Capability Study, at 27, https://gflec.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/07/NFCS_2015_Report_Natl_Findings.pdf.  
29 Health Affairs, “Hospital Lawsuits Over Unpaid Bills Increased By 37 Percent In Wisconsin From 2001 To 2018,” 
 https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.2021.01130.  
30 Jordan Cahn et al., “The Association of Childbirth with Medical Debt in the USA, 2019 - 2020,” J Gen Intern 
Med. 2023 Aug; 38(10): 2340–2346, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10192781/#CR7.  

 
6 
Historically marginalized communities probably incur a higher rate of deferred interest 
charges. Only 62 percent of individuals with subprime or deep subprime credit scores paid off 
deferred interest credit cards in 2019, as compared with 89 percent of those with superprime 
balances.31 Black and Latino individuals are more likely to have lower credit scores, due 
disparities in wealth caused by centuries of discrimination.32 For instance, the median white 
household has a net worth 10 times that of the median Black household.33 Wealth allows 
households to weather financial setbacks, such as a job loss or unexpected medical expenses. 
When patients experience these financial obstacles and cannot pay off the balance on a deferred 
interest credit card by the end of the promotional period, they incur significant interest charges 
on top of the remaining balance – worsening their financial difficulties. Further, patients are 
more likely to be sued by credit card companies than by medical providers.34  
 
Some immigrant communities may also be disproportionately impacted by medical 
payment products. Noncitizens are significantly more likely than citizens to be uninsured due to 
restrictions on federal benefits and reduced access to employer-sponsored coverage.35 Notably, 
we have heard concerning reports from our partner organizations of medical credit cards being 
promoted to populations with limited English proficiency (LEP), who are heavily dependent on 
translators to understand complex financial terms.   
  
4. Patients can pay for care in many different ways, such as by medical credit 
card or loan, general purpose credit card, insurance, or through a zero-interest 
payment plan.  What are the costs and benefits for health care providers of 
offering each of these methods?  Are there situations where one method of 
payment is more advantageous than another?   
 
Please see our response above to General Question 1: “What are the benefits, costs, and 
risks of medical payment products for consumers, health care providers, and companies offering 
these products?” 
  
5. Where medical payment products are causing harm, what are some specific 
levers for regulatory oversight and enforcement by Federal agencies that 
regulate financial products or health care providers? Are there specific areas for 
Federal enforcement actions? Are there examples of regulation or enforcement 
at the State or local level to which the Federal government should look?   
 
 
31 CFPB, “Consumer Credit Market,” p. 97, https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_consumer-credit-
card-market-report_2021.pdf.  
32 National Consumer Law Center, “Past Imperfect: How Credit Scores and Other Analytics Bake In and Perpetuate 
Past Discrimination,” May 2016, https://www.nclc.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/Past_Imperfect.pdf.  
33 Brookings Institution, “Closing the Racial Wealth Gap Requires Heavy, Progressive Taxation of Wealth,” 
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/closing-the-racial-wealth-gap-requires-heavy-progressive-taxation-of-wealth/.  
34 National Consumer Law Center, “Dealing with Medical Debt: Advice from NCLC,” 
https://library.nclc.org/article/dealing-medical-debt-consumer-advice-nclc.  
35 KFF, “Health Coverage and Care of Immigrants,” https://www.kff.org/racial-equity-and-health-policy/fact-
sheet/health-coverage-and-care-of-immigrants/.  

 
7 
As we have previously requested, the CFPB should ban the offering and promotion of 
these products in health care settings.36 In 2009, Congress passed the Credit Card, 
Accountability, Responsibility and Disclosures (CARD) Act in order to “establish fair and 
transparent practices relating to the extension of credit.”37  As the CFPB has acknowledged, 
“Deferred interest products...remain the most glaring exception to the general post-CARD Act 
trend toward upfront credit pricing.”38  
 
The CFPB has the legal authority to prohibit deferred interest credit products.39 Further, 
the CFPB has significant evidence of the harm that these products cause in health care settings.40 
Indeed, CFPB Director Rohit Chopra recently noted: “While medical payment products can offer 
an enticing promise of cost savings, convenient payment plans and administrative ease for 
medical providers, our research indicates that in many cases, patients who use these 
products end up worse off.”41 The CFPB has enough information to take action now.  
 
As a model, the CFPB should look at California law.42 California prohibits providers and 
their employees from arranging for or establishing an open-end credit or loan with a deferred 
interest provision.43 Further, before offering any credit or loan through a third party, the provider 
must provide a treatment plan that indicates: (1) if the provider accepts Medi-Cal,44 whether 
Medi-Cal would cover an alternative, medically necessary service; and (2) that the patient has 
the right to ask for only services covered by Medi-Cal.45 Providers should make such disclosures 
about any insurance coverage or available financial assistance before signing patients up for 
financing products.  
 
Finally, the CFPB can take enforcement action against deceptive and abusive practices in 
health care financing, as the agency did in 2013 against CareCredit.46 We emphasize, however, 
that enforcement actions do not solve the underlying problems with health care providers 
offering deferred interest credit cards in the first place. This is demonstrated by the numerous 
 
36 See Community Catalyst, Petition to the CFPB for a Rulemaking Pursuant to the Credit Card Accountability and 
Disclosure Act of 2009, Apr. 13, 2023, https://www.regulations.gov/document/CFPB-2023-0028-0001.  
37 Pub. L. 111-24. 
38 CFPB, “Consumer Credit Card Market Report,” at 10, December 2015, 
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/201512_cfpb_report-the-consumer-credit-card-market.pdf.  
39 15 U.S.C. § 1637(j) (prohibiting double-cycle billing); 15 U.S. Code § 1666i–1 (prohibiting retroactive rate 
increases); see generally National Consumer Law Center, “Deceptive Bargain: The Hidden Time Bomb of Deferred 
Interest Credit Cards,” 18-20, https://www.nclc.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/report-deferred-interest.pdf.  
40 CFPB, “Medical Credit Cards and Financing Plans,” May 2023, 
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_medical-credit-cards-and-financing-plans_2023-05.pdf. 
41 CFPB, “Prepared Remarks of Director Rohit Chopra for the CFPB Hearing on Medical Billing and Collections,” 
June 11, 2023 (emphasis added), https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/prepared-remarks-of-
director-rohit-chopra-for-the-cfpb-hearing-on-medical-billing-and-collections/.  
42 California Business and Professions Code 654.3.  
43 California Business and Professions Code 654.3(b).  
44 Medi-Cal is the California Medicaid program.  
45 California Business and Professions Code 654.3(h)(3). Additionally, Medi-Cal providers who are notified of a 
patient's Medi-Cal eligibility may not seek payment, such as through the offer of a credit or loan product, for the 
cost of covered services. Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code Sec. 14019.4(a). 
46 CFPB, “CFPB Orders GE CareCredit to Refund $34.1 Million for Deceptive Health-Care Credit Card 
Enrollment,” Dec. 10, 2013, https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/cfpb-orders-ge-carecredit-to-
refund-34-1-million-for-deceptive-health-care-credit-card-enrollment/.  

 
8 
complaints in the CFPB database about unexpected charges after patients signed up for deferred 
interest credit cards in health care settings.47  Indeed, the CFPB has acknowledged these 
underlying problems with deferred interest credit products: 
 
The costs of deferred-interest financing are typically less transparent ...Those 
who fail to pay off the balance in full, for example those with even a very small 
balance carried past the promotional expiration date, can end up owing much 
more in interest than the remaining balance due. We have received many 
consumer complaints from people who have found that they have incurred 
this unexpected charge.48 
  
CFPB questions 
 
1. What actions should the CFPB consider taking to address problematic 
practices related to medical credit cards or loans, including debt collection and 
credit reporting practices?  
 
As noted above, the CFPB should ban the offering and promotion of deferred interest 
credit cards in health care settings.  In addition, the CFPB should ban the reporting of medical 
debt on consumer credit reports.49 To ensure that medical debt on credit cards is identifiable, the 
CFPB should ensure that credit card lenders are requiring health care providers to identify 
themselves using the Merchant Category Codes for the appropriate medical services and 
supplies.50   
 
Additionally, the CFPB should require companies to allow patients to cancel medical 
financing if they are later determined eligible for financial assistance or public coverage. 
Providers should also screen for financial assistance eligibility prior to offering medical 
financing products. 
 
2. Do consumers understand the risks of paying medical bills via a medical 
credit card, installment loan, or other commercial payment product, including 
lowered ability to negotiate their bill with their provider?  
 
As noted above in the response to General Question 5, consumers frequently do not 
understand the risks of deferred interest credit cards. There is ample evidence in the CFPB's 
consumer complaint database that consumers are often surprised by unexpected and significant 
interest charges. Patients who are persuaded to sign up for medical credit cards often do not even 
understand that these financing products are offered by third parties, not directly through their 
 
47 E.g., CFPB Complaint 6401464, received Jan. 5, 2023; CFPB Complaint 6098379, received Oct. 18, 2022; CFPB 
Complaint 3949387, received Nov. 12, 2020.    
48 CFPB, Letter to Credit Card Companies, June 8, 2017 (emphasis added), 
files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/Deferred_Interest__Letter.pdf.  
49 See Community Catalyst Petition to the CFPB, Apr. 13, 2023, https://www.regulations.gov/document/CFPB-2023-
0027-0001.  
50 See, e.g., Visa Merchant Data Standards Manual - Visa Supplemental Requirements, Apr. 2023, 102 (MCC 8011 - 
Doctors and Physicians (Not Elsewhere Classified)), available at 
https://usa.visa.com/content/dam/VCOM/download/merchants/visa-merchant-data-standards-manual.pdf.  

 
9 
health care provider.  They are also offered these products in health care settings at a time when 
they are vulnerable, seeking essential care that they need. 
 
Additionally, consumers often do not understand what they are giving up when they use 
credit cards. As noted above in the response to General Question 1, patients are giving up the 
opportunity to negotiate a payment plan directly with the provider, to seek financial assistance 
from the provider, or to correct billing errors directly through the provider.  
 
4. When hospitals write off a patient’s debt as uncollectible or “bad debt” and 
cease attempts to collect, do they notify patients that collection attempts will 
cease? Would patients benefit from such notifications, and would such 
notifications reduce hospital revenue?  
 
Hospitals generally do not notify patients when medical debts have been written off as 
uncollectible. Such notifications would make a huge difference for patients, however. About 
two-thirds of individuals with medical debt reported delaying or skipping care that they or a 
family member needed.51 Significantly, medical debt itself is associated with higher cancer 
mortality rates.52 
 
We believe these notifications would not impact hospital revenue because it is unlikely 
patients would otherwise start paying in the future. Indeed, that is precisely what a hospital 
concludes when it classifies the debt as uncollectible. While the additional notification would 
entail some additional administrative responsibilities on hospitals, we note that hospitals already 
have systems in place to regularly send out statements on outstanding bills. The burden of adding 
an additional notification once the debt has been written off as uncollectible would be minimal. 
 
Further, hospitals already receive reimbursement for a large portion of uncollectible 
patient debt. Specifically, federal and state governments reimburse hospitals for approximately 
80 percent of uncompensated care costs for uninsured patients.53 It is patently unfair for hospitals 
to collect reimbursement for the majority of their costs but not inform the affected patients, who 
may be avoiding or delaying important care because of outstanding bills.  
 
Additionally, many patients whose debt is deemed uncollectible should have qualified for 
free or discounted care under the hospital’s financial assistance policy. For instance, in 2020, up 
to 48 percent of uncollectible debt for patients at North Carolina nonprofit hospitals should have 
been provided as charity care.54 In other words, a large portion of uncollectible debt is for 
 
51 KFF Health News, “100 Million Americans Are Saddled with Health Care Debt,” June 16, 2022, 
https://kffhealthnews.org/news/article/diagnosis-debt-investigation-100-million-americans-hidden-medical-debt/.  
52 Xin Hu, Zhiyuan Zheng, Kewei Sylvia Shi, Robin Yabroff, and Xuesong Han, “Association of medical debt and 
cancer mortality in the US,” Journal of Clinical Oncology 2023 41:16_suppl, 6505-6505 (medical debt is associated 
with higher cancer mortality at the county level). 
53 KFF, “Sources of Payment for Uncompensated Care for the Uninsured,” April 6, 2021, 
https://www.kff.org/uninsured/issue-brief/sources-of-payment-for-uncompensated-care-for-the-uninsured/.  
54 North Carolina State Health Plan for Teachers and State Employees, Rice University’s Baker Institute for Public 
Policy, “North Carolina Nonprofit Hospitals Bill the Poor,” North Carolina Department of State Treasurer, Jan. 26, 
2022,  https://www.nctreasurer.com/news/press-releases/2022/01/26/some-north-carolina-nonprofit-hospitals-
billing-poor-patients-amid-failures-charity-care.  

 
10
patients who never should have been billed in the first place. At the very least, hospitals should 
inform these patients that they are no longer at risk for collection actions.  
  
HHS Questions 
 
1. Are there particular health care provider types that are most associated with 
being offered or offering medical payment products?   
 
The use of medical payment products is widespread, and it appears to be increasing. For 
instance, Synchrony Bank announced that the CareCredit network included over 266,000 
locations in 2022.55 Dental providers accounted for 53 percent of the fees and interest on loans in 
Synchrony Bank’s Health and Wellness line.56 
 
Deferred interest credit cards are particularly prevalent in dental care due to the 
widespread lack of insurance coverage in this area. Medicare does not cover most dental care, 
including cleanings, fillings, tooth extractions, or dentures.57 Dental coverage for adults is not 
currently an Essential Health Benefit (EHB), so insurers do not have to offer adult dental 
coverage.58  We urge HHS to include adult dental coverage as an EHB, which will improve 
health outcomes and decrease health care debt. 59   
 
Medical payment products are also increasing in the hospital sector. Hospitals offering 
medical payment products include Atrium Health in North Carolina, Allina Health in Minnesota, 
Chino Valley Medical Center in California, and UNC Health in North Carolina.60 These medical 
payment products can increase medical debt significantly.  
 
For instance, UNC Health, which had long offered payment plans with no interest, began 
contracting with AccessOne in 2019.61 By 2022, around 100,000 UNC Health patients had an 
AccessOne loan, about half of whom had an interest rate of 13 percent on their loans.62 As NPR 
noted, a patient with a $7,000 hospital bill who enrolls in a five-year financing plan at 13 percent 
interest will pay at least $2,500 in interest on top of the original debt.63  
  
2. How might HHS improve patient understanding of options for covering the 
cost of medical treatments? At what points in the care process could patients be 
 
55 Synchrony Bank 10-K for the fiscal year ending Dec. 31, 2022. Note that CareCredit cards include both deferred 
interest credit cards and other credit cards that do not include deferred interest terms. Further, CareCredit cards can 
be used for “health and wellness” purchases other than medical or dental care, such as veterinary care. 
56 Id.  
57 Dental services, https://www.medicare.gov/coverage/dental-services.  
58 Essential health benefits, https://www.healthcare.gov/glossary/essential-health-benefits/.  
59 Letter to HHS and CMS in Response to December 2022 Request for Information on EHBs, July 19, 2023, 
https://communitycatalyst.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/EHB-Sign-on-Letter-7.19.pdf.  
60 NPR, “How Banks and Hospitals Are Cashing In When Patients Can’t Pay for Health Care,” Nov. 17, 2022, 
https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2022/11/17/1136201685/medical-debt-high-interest-credit-cards-hospitals-
profit. 
61 Id.  
62 Id.  
63 Id.  

 
11
provided with information about their financial obligations and payment 
options?  
 
HHS could improve patient understanding of options for covering the cost of medical 
treatments by: (1) increasing the accessibility of financial assistance; (2) providing guidance to 
assure hospitals that they may advertise the availability of financial assistance; and (3) 
addressing the high rates of insurance denials.  
 
To increase the accessibility of financial assistance, HHS should publish a model 
streamlined financial assistance application and encourage hospitals to use this application. The 
model application should not require excessive documentation or burdensome requirements, 
such as notarization. Further, the model application should not require information on 
immigration status or residency.  The model application should be translated into Spanish, at a 
minimum, which could also reduce translation costs for hospitals that use the recommended 
application.  
 
Further, HHS should require hospitals to screen patients for eligibility for the hospital's 
financial assistance policy, unless the patient declines screening. This could be accomplished 
through Conditions of Participation for hospitals that participate in Medicare and Medicaid. 
Please see the section titled Recommendations for Medical Debt for further discussion. 
 
To assure hospitals, HHS should publish guidance on the permissibility of advertising 
financial assistance policies. Many hospitals do not inform patients about presumptive eligibility 
for financial assistance or proactively notify patients about financial assistance because of fear of 
liability. Specifically, we have heard that many hospitals believe such notifications could be 
considered improper inducement of Medicare or Medicaid beneficiaries64 or could result in 
liability under the Anti-Kickback Statute.65 To be clear, we do not believe these concerns have 
any merit.66 However, we request that HHS provide updated guidance67 to assure hospitals that 
they may notify patients about presumptive eligibility determinations and generally advertise the 
availability of financial assistance without risking such liability. 
 
Finally, HHS should also address the high rates of insurance denials. Such denials 
complicate predictions about the cost of treatment. Please see Recommendations for Medical 
Debt further discussion on insurance denials.  
  
Treasury Questions 
 
1. What policy actions should Treasury consider taking to address problematic 
practices related to medical credit cards or loans, including debt collection and 
 
64 42 U.S.C. §1320a–7a(5) (civil monetary penalties may be imposed for offering remuneration to any individual 
eligible for Medicare or Medicaid in order to influence their choice of provider).  
65 42 U.S. Code § 1320a–7b(b). 
66 E.g., CMS, “Questions on Charges for the Uninsured,” Feb. 17, 2004, https://www.cms.gov/medicare/medicare-
fee-for-service-payment/acuteinpatientpps/downloads/faq_uninsured.pdf (“Nothing...prohibits a hospital from 
waiving collection of charges to any patients, Medicare or non-Medicare, including low-income, uninsured, or 
medically indigent individuals, if it is done as part of the hospital’s indigency policy.”).  
67 Such guidance could be in the form of a Special Advisory Bulletin or a shorter policy statement.  

 
12
credit reporting practices, to conform with the existing tax laws and regulations 
pertaining to tax-exempt hospitals?  
 
First, Treasury should enforce existing requirements for nonprofit hospitals, including 
both specific rules relating to financial assistance and general expectations for tax-exempt, 
charitable institutions. When nonprofit hospitals offer medical payment products, Treasury 
should analyze whether the hospitals are offering such products in place of financial assistance. 
Finally, Treasury should require screening for financial assistance eligibility prior to offering 
medical payment products.  
 
Many nonprofit hospitals are not complying with existing requirements for financial 
assistance or, more generally, with expectations for tax-exempt, charitable institutions. For 
instance, instead of complying with the statutory requirement to “widely publicize” their 
financial assistance policies,68 45 percent of nonprofit hospitals routinely bill patients whose 
incomes are low enough to qualify for financial assistance.69 In North Carolina, nonprofit 
hospitals brought over 90 percent of lawsuits against patients.70  
 
When nonprofit hospitals push medical payment products, there may be underlying 
problems with the hospital’s financial assistance policies and practices. For instance, nonprofit 
Atrium Health in North Carolina advertises AccessOne financing on its website, high above the 
notification about financial assistance.71 Atrium Health also filed the most lawsuits against 
patients of any hospital in North Carolina.72 While Treasury should scrutinize Atrium’s 
promotion of AccessOne, Treasury should also ask why Atrium Health, a purportedly charitable 
institution that generates over $27 billion in revenue,73 is not providing more financial assistance 
to patients who cannot pay their hospital bills.  
 
Finally, Treasury should require nonprofit hospitals to offer to screen patients for 
financial assistance eligibility prior to offering medical payment products. Treasury should also 
consider requiring hospitals to use the tools they have for screening for financial products to 
screen for financial assistance or Medicaid eligibility.  
  
2. Should a tax-exempt hospital’s signing patients up for medical payment 
products be considered similar to a tax-exempt hospital’s selling medical debt, 
such that the special rules that only exclude debt sales from being extraordinary 
 
68 See 26 U.S.C. 501(r)(4)(A)(v) (requiring nonprofit hospitals to have measures to widely publicize their financial 
assistance policy).  
69 KFF Health News, “Patients Eligible for Charity Care Instead Getting Big Bills,” Oct. 14, 2019, available at: 
https://kffhealthnews.org/news/patients-eligible-for-charity-care-instead-get-big-bills/.  
70 Barak Richman et al., Hospitals Suing Patients, at 2, August 2023, 
https://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=6961&context=faculty_scholarship.  
71 https://atriumhealth.org/for-patients-visitors (“AccessOne helps patients to manage their medical bills by offering 
easy ways to make monthly payments.”).  
72 Barak Richman et al., “Hospitals Suing Patients,” at 12, August 2023, 
https://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=6961&context=faculty_scholarship.  
73 Advocate Health Care, “Advocate Aurora Health and Atrium Health to combine,” (noting that the new 
organization will have combined revenues of $27 billion), https://www.advocatehealth.com/news/advocate-aurora-
health-and-atrium-health-to-combine.  

 
13
collection actions if certain requirements are met would be applied to these 
payment products?  
 
We agree that medical financing products can have significant collection implications for 
patients. However, we are concerned that this proposal would offer limited protection to patients 
because many nonprofit hospitals do not comply with current restrictions on extraordinary 
collection actions (ECAs). We urge Treasury to strengthen and enforce current rules related to 
ECAs. We also urge Treasury to strengthen and enforce current rules related to financial 
assistance so that fewer patients require financing to afford care.  
 
First, Treasury should note that many hospitals do not comply with the statutory 
requirement to make reasonable efforts to determine whether a patient is eligible for financial 
assistance prior to engaging in ECAs.74  Indeed, nonprofit hospitals are more likely than for-
profit hospitals to sue patients for debt75 and more likely than for-profit hospitals to garnish 
patient wages.76 Over a two-year period, New York nonprofit hospitals placed 4,880 liens on 
patient homes, although many of these patients likely qualified for financial assistance.77   
 
Second, Treasury should strengthen current rules regarding ECAs. For instance, Treasury 
should prohibit nonprofit hospitals from engaging in the following ECAs: (1) garnishing patient 
wages; (2) foreclosing on primary residences; (3) placing liens on primary residences; and (4) 
bringing civil actions against patients or their family members to collect hospital debt. Treasury 
should also require nonprofit hospitals to offer to screen patients for financial assistance prior to 
engaging in ECAs.  
 
Third, as detailed in Question 5 below, Treasury should strengthen and enforce 
requirements to make financial assistance policies more accessible so that patients can afford the 
care they need.  
  
4. How do tax-exempt hospitals’ promotion of medical payment products 
compare to their operationalization of the requirement that their financial 
assistance policies be widely publicized?   
 
Nonprofit hospitals are not complying with the statutory requirement to widely publicize 
their financial assistance policies.  We are deeply concerned by the increasing number of patients 
 
74 26 U.S.C. 501(r)(6).  
75 Barak Richman et al., “Hospitals Suing Patients,” at 2, August 2023, 
https://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=6961&context=faculty_scholarship (nonprofit hospitals 
brought over 90% of the lawsuits against patients in North Carolina over a five-year period); Zack Cooper, James 
Han, Neale Mahoney, “Hospital Lawsuits Increased by 37 Percent in Wisconsin from 2001 to 2018,” 40 Health 
Affairs, 1830– 1835 (Dec. 2021),  https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.2021.01130# (nonprofit 
hospitals in Wisconsin were more likely to sue patients than for-profit hospitals).  
76 Bruhn WE, Rutkow L, Wang P, et al. Prevalence and Characteristics of Virginia Hospitals Suing Patients and 
Garnishing Wages for Unpaid Medical Bills. JAMA. 2019;322(7):691–692. doi:10.1001/jama.2019.9144, 
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2737183.  
77 Community Service Society of New York, “Discharged Into Debt: Nonprofit Hospitals File Liens on Patients’ 
Homes,” at 2 and 9, November 2021, https://cssny.org/publications/entry/discharged-into-debt-nonprofit-hospitals-
file-liens-on-patients-homes (many of the counties where liens were frequently placed on patient homes have 
median incomes below the threshold for financial assistance in New York).  

 
14
using medical financing products to afford care. It is likely that many patients who use medical 
financing products would have qualified for financial assistance. Further, the effective promotion 
by nonprofit hospitals of medical financing products shows that nonprofit hospitals could be 
doing more to inform patients about financial assistance.  
 
Significantly, nonprofit hospitals are not effectively notifying eligible patients about 
financial assistance. As previously noted, about 45 percent of nonprofit hospitals routinely bill 
patients whose incomes should qualify them for charity care,78 and large portions of uncollectible 
debt are from patients who should have qualified for charity care.79 Some hospitals even 
deliberately obscure the availability of financial assistance. For instance, the Providence health 
system, one of the country’s largest nonprofits, provided employees “with a detailed playbook 
for wringing money out of patients – even those who were supposed to receive free care because 
of their low incomes.”80 
 
In contrast, some nonprofit hospitals do prominently advertise medical financing on their 
websites. For instance, nonprofit Atrium Health advertises AccessOne financing at the top of its 
Patients and Visitors page, including a list of benefits such as “Flexible payment plans and no 
hidden fees” and “Bilingual staff.”81 Patients must scroll much farther down to find a section on 
Financial Assistance, which does not list any benefits of the program or the fact that translations 
are available.82  
 
Similarly, nonprofit St. Luke’s University Health Network lists benefits of CareCredit on 
its Payment Options webpage, highlighting that the “promotional financing options to help you 
get the care you need, when you need it.”83 The same page provides only a link to “Self-
Pay/Uninsured.” Unlike the CareCredit announcement, the Self Pay/Uninsured section does not 
provide any information about the program or even explain that it refers to financial assistance or 
“charity care.”84 
 
Instead of promoting medical payment products, nonprofit hospitals should promote 
financial assistance and train their office and billing staff to assist patients with financial 
assistance applications. Treasury should strengthen the regulations on widely publicizing 
financial assistance policies, looking to what nonprofit hospital are doing to advertise medical 
payment products as examples of what could be done to promote financial assistance. Treasury 
should also bring enforcement actions against nonprofit hospitals that deliberately obscure the 
availability of financial assistance.  
 
78 KFF Health News, “Patients Eligible for Charity Care Instead Getting Big Bills,” Oct. 14, 2019, 
https://kffhealthnews.org/news/patients-eligible-for-charity-care-instead-get-big-bills/. 
79 North Carolina State Health Plan for Teachers and State Employees, Rice University’s Baker Institute for Public 
Policy, “North Carolina Nonprofit Hospitals Bill the Poor,” North Carolina Department of State Treasurer, Jan. 26, 
2022,  https://www.nctreasurer.com/news/press-releases/2022/01/26/some-north-carolina-nonprofit-hospitals-
billing-poor-patients-amid-failures-charity-care. 
80 New York Times, “They Were Entitled to Free Care. Hospitals Hounded Them to Pay,” Dec. 15, 2022, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/09/24/business/nonprofit-hospitals-poor-patients.html. 
81 https://atriumhealth.org/for-patients-visitors.  
82 Id.  
83 https://www.slhn.org/billpay/payment-options.  
84 Id.  

 
15
 
5. What are best practices for hospitals publishing and making patients aware 
of financial assistance programs (beyond compliance with the widely publicized 
requirements found in the section 501(r) regulations)?   
 
We recommend the following practices for hospitals: 
 
a. Screen all patients for eligibility for financial assistance, unless the patient 
declines screening;   
b. Use presumptive eligibility for certain groups of likely qualified patients;  
c. Include a prominent link to the financial assistance application (not just the 
Financial Assistance Policy (FAP) summary) on the hospital's homepage; 
d. Include a prominent link to the financial assistance application on all payment 
portals;   
e. Use a simplified application that does not require excessive documentation, 
notarization, or request information on citizenship status or assets;  
f. Include paper copies of the financial assistance application (not just the FAP 
summary) in waiting areas, intake and discharge paperwork, and with all billing 
statements;   
g. Assist patients with the financial assistance application;  
h. Ensure that translated versions of the FAP application are accessible to those who 
do not speak English, for example by requiring that translated copies of the FAP 
application are provided to patients who the hospital has reason to know speak a 
language other than English; 
i. When applicable, use marketplace determinations of income rather than requiring 
patients to provide additional documentation of income;  
j. Use pay stubs to determine income (rather than requiring tax returns or non-filing 
letters); and   
k. Verbally inform patients about financial assistance in all calls about billing and 
collection matters.    
 
We also emphasize that many nonprofit hospitals’ financial assistance policies do not 
cover key hospital providers and services, such as anesthesia services, laboratory/pathology 
services, and independent providers. However, patients do not choose their providers at the 
hospital, and patients often have little insight into whether particular providers are directly 
employed by the hospital or independent contractors. To ensure that essential hospital care is 
covered by financial assistance policies, we urge Treasury to require nonprofit hospitals to 
include all hospital providers and services in their financial assistance policies.  
  
6. Does the availability of medical payment products generally benefit the 
community or assist patients financially?  
 
Please see our response to General Question 1. 
 
 
  

 
16
Recommendations to Address Medical Debt 
  
We appreciate that the Agencies have also requested “comment on policy options to 
address practices by health care providers...that result in consumers paying excess costs.”85 
While we applaud the Agencies’ attention to medical payment products, we urge them to also 
address the systemic issues that leave patients in need of financing for medical care. Each of the 
Agencies should use its existing authority to significantly reduce medical debt in this country. 
We provide specific recommendations for Treasury and HHS below. 
 
I. 
Treasury 
 
Treasury should strengthen requirements for nonprofit hospitals under Section 501(r) of 
the Internal Revenue Code. Treasury should also issue guidance to nonprofit hospitals on 
expectations for charity care. Finally, Treasury should increase transparency and enforce existing 
requirements for nonprofit hospitals.  
 
A. Strengthen Regulations Implementing Section 501(r) 
 
Treasury should strengthen the current regulations that implement Section 501(r) of the 
Internal Revenue Code. The regulations should: (1) ensure that financial assistance policies are 
widely accessible to patients; (2) prohibit billing any patients inflated charges; and (3) require 
nonprofit hospitals to determine patient eligibility for financial assistance prior to engaging in 
ECAs, and ban the most harmful ECAs altogether.  
 
First, Treasury should increase the accessibility of financial assistance policies by 
enacting regulations to require the steps outlined in response to Treasury Question 5. Nonprofit 
hospitals are not effectively informing eligible patients about the availability of financial 
assistance. At the same time, many nonprofit hospitals are effectively advertising and promoting 
medical financing products, showing that the such hospitals could be doing more to connect 
eligible patients with financial assistance. Treasury should strengthen these regulations to ensure 
that patients learn about and access the financial assistance to which they are entitled.  
 
Second, Treasury should prohibit nonprofit hospitals from billing any patient gross 
charges. These charges, often known as “chargemaster” rates, are inflated prices that no payor 
actually reimburses.86 The statute prohibits nonprofits from using gross charges generally, but 
current regulations only apply this protection to patients who are eligible for financial 
assistance.87 This leaves other patients at risk for inflated charges, as a recent investigation 
found: “Hospitals routinely bill uninsured patients their highest rates.”88 Treasury should protect 
 
85 88 Fed. Reg. 132 at 44282.   
86 NPR, “Hospitals Have Started Posting Their Prices Online. Here's What They Reveal,” July 2, 2021, 
https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2021/07/02/1012317032/hospitals-have-started-posting-their-prices-
online-heres- what-they-reveal.  
87 Compare 26 U.S.C. 501(r)(5)(B) (a nonprofit hospital must “prohibit[] the use of gross charges”) with 26 C.F.R. 
1.501(r)-5(A) (prohibiting nonprofit hospitals from using gross charges for care that is covered under their financial 
assistance policies).  
88 Wall Street Journal, “Hospitals Often Charge Uninsured People Their Highest Prices, New Data Show,” July 6, 
2021. 

 
17
all patients from paying inflated charges by amending the regulation to be consistent with the 
broad statutory prohibition on gross charges.  
 
Third, Treasury should require nonprofit hospitals to determine patient eligibility for 
financial assistance prior to engaging in ECAs. The statute requires nonprofit hospitals to make 
“reasonable efforts” to determine financial assistance eligibility prior to initiating ECAs.89 Given 
the prevalence of property liens against patients in low-income communities90 and the sheer 
number of lawsuits filed by some nonprofit hospitals,91 it is clear that the regulations on 
“reasonable efforts” should be strengthened.  Treasury should: (1) prohibit ECAs until after 
patients have been screened for eligibility for federal or state programs or hospital financial 
assistance, unless the patient declines screening; and (2) require nonprofit hospitals to process 
financial assistance applications at any time during the collection process.   
 
Further, Treasury should prohibit the most harmful ECAs. These include: (1) the denial 
of medical care due to outstanding bills; (2) wage garnishment; (3) bank account seizures; (4) 
home foreclosures; and (5) property liens. Such actions have devastating and long-lasting effects 
on the health and well-being of patients, and they are inconsistent with longstanding 
requirements for tax-exempt, charitable institutions.92  
 
B. Clarify Expectations for Charity Care  
 
Treasury should clarify expectations for nonprofit hospitals concerning charity care. 
Specifically, Treasury should reinstate the previous requirement that nonprofit hospitals provide 
charity care to the extent of their financial abilities and provide guidance on the patients who 
should qualify for charity care. Treasury, through the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), should 
issue a new Revenue Ruling with such guidance.  
 
In 1956, the IRS issued a Revenue Ruling on nonprofit hospitals.93 The IRS noted that  
hospitals are typically granted federal tax exemptions because they are organized and operated  
for charitable purposes.94 Ultimately, the IRS held that, in order for a hospital to qualify for 
federal tax exemption as a charitable organization, the hospital must provide charity care “to the 
extent of its financial ability.”95 
 
89 26 U.S.C. § 501(r)(6).  
90 Community Service Society of New York, “Discharged Into Debt: Nonprofit Hospitals File Liens on Patients’ 
Homes,” at 2 and 9, November 2021, https://cssny.org/publications/entry/discharged-into-debt-nonprofit-hospitals-
file-liens-on-patients-homes (in many of the counties where hospitals frequently placed property liens on patient 
homes, the median incomes are below the threshold for financial assistance in New York). 
91 KFF Health News, UVA Has Ruined Us: Health System Sues Thousands Of Patients, Seizing Paychecks And 
Claiming Homes, https://kffhealthnews.org/news/uva-health-system-sues-patients-virginia-courts-garnishment-liens-
bankruptcy/ (noting that the University of Virginia Health System sued 36,000 patients over a six-year period and 
frequently garnished wages from patients with low-wage jobs).  
92 Better Bus. Bureau v. United States, 326 U.S. 279, 283 (1945) (holding that a single non-exempt purpose, such as 
the pursuit of profits, will destroy a tax-exemption regardless of the number of truly exempt purposes)  
93 Rev. Rul. 56-185, 1956-1 C.B. 202. 
94 Id. at 1 (emphasis added).  
95 Id. at 2.   

 
18
Subsequently, the IRS issued a new Revenue Ruling (“1969 Revenue Ruling”) that 
replaced the previous charity care requirement with a “community benefits” standard.96 The IRS 
explicitly removed the previous requirement that nonprofit hospitals provide free or discounted 
care.97  Under the new community benefits standard, hospitals could qualify for tax exemption 
through practices such as accepting Medicare and Medicaid patients, maintaining an open 
medical staff policy, operating an emergency room open to all, and having a Board of Trustees 
comprised of independent civic leaders.98 Today, as the IRS has acknowledged, most of these 
factors have lost relevance due to legislative and industry developments.99  
Significantly, the 1969 Revenue Ruling removed the charity requirements for 
nonprofit hospitals based primarily on lobbying by the hospital industry. Hospitals argued 
that, after the enactment of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965, the demand for charity care would 
not be sufficient to satisfy the previous IRS standard and thus a more flexible standard for 
nonprofit hospitals was necessary.100 The epidemic of medical debt in this country – most of 
which originates from hospitals – demonstrates that the assumptions underlying the 1969 
Revenue Ruling were tragically incorrect.   
To address these issues, the IRS should issue a revised Revenue Ruling on nonprofit 
hospitals. Specifically, the IRS should reinstate the previous requirement that nonprofit hospitals 
be “operated to the extent of [their] financial ability for those unable to pay.”101 The IRS should 
also provide guidance on the term “unable to pay,” such as a rebuttable presumption that 
uninsured patients under 200 percent of the Federal Poverty Line and insured patients with out-
of-pocket medical costs over 10 percent of their household income are “unable to pay” and 
should qualify for charity care.  
 
 
 
 
 
96 Rev. Rul. 69-545, 1969-2 C.B. 117.   
97 Id. at 4.   
98 Id. at 3.   
99 See, e.g., The Tax-Exempt Hospitals Sector, Hearing before the House Ways and Means Committee, 109th Cong. 
at 13, (2005) (statement of Mark W. Everson, Commissioner of Internal Revenue) (“Having an open medical staff, 
participating in Medicare and Medicaid, and treating all emergency patients without regard to ability to pay are now 
common features of tax-exempt and for-profit hospitals rather than distinguishing factors”).  
100 Congressional Research Service, “501(c)(3) Hospitals and the Community Benefits Standard,” at 2, May 12, 
2010, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/RL/RL34605 (“It appears the community benefit standard was 
adopted partly in response to the enactment in 1965 of Medicare and Medicaid, which some thought would reduce 
the need for hospitals to provide charity care.”); Senate Finance Committee Minority Staff, “Tax Exempt Hospitals: 
Discussion Draft,” at 5 July 19, 2007, 
https://www.finance.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/prg071907a.pdf (“It is important for policymakers (including those 
in the executive branch) to recognize that Rev. Rul. 69-545 was not put forward by the IRS in response to 
any changes in the tax laws [but instead it was] based on what turned out to be an inaccurate expectation of other 
legislation (namely that Medicaid and Medicare would eliminate or greatly reduce the need for charity care)”; 
House Ways and Means Committee Hearing on the Tax Exempt Hospital Sector, Statement of John Colombo at 87 
(May 26, 2005), https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-109hhrg26414/pdf/CHRG-109hhrg26414.pdf 
(explaining that nonprofit hospitals began lobbying the IRS for new exemption standards in the mid-1960s, arguing 
that there would no longer be a sufficient demand for charity care after the passage of Medicare and Medicaid). 
101 Rev. Rul. 56-185, 1956-1 C.B. 202 at 2.   

 
19
C. Strengthen Transparency Requirements and Enforcement of Existing Requirements 
for Nonprofit Hospitals 
 
a. Transparency 
 
The IRS should increase transparency regarding nonprofit hospitals’ financial assistance 
practices. Specifically, the IRS should require hospitals to report the total number of financial 
assistance applications received and the total number approved. The current IRS Form 990 
Schedule H only requests the number of persons who received financial assistance, and 
disclosure is optional.102 Clear and consistent reporting on financial assistance applications is 
essential to allow oversight of these practices.  
 
b. Enforcement 
 
The IRS should send a stronger signal to hospitals about the importance of compliance by 
enforcing existing requirements. For ten years, the IRS did not revoke the tax-exempt status of 
any nonprofit hospitals, even though some reported no spending at all on financial assistance or 
community benefits.103 Indeed, despite press accounts of nonprofit hospitals denying necessary 
medical care104 and pursuing collections so aggressively that patients could no longer afford 
groceries, 105 we are not aware of the IRS investigating or revoking the nonprofit status of any of 
these hospitals.  
 
While we understand that IRS investigations and audits are not public, it does not appear 
that many nonprofit hospitals face tax repercussions for actions that are inconsistent with Section 
501(r) and with their status as charitable institutions. We urge the IRS to increase investigation 
and enforcement activities in this area. 
 
II. 
HHS 
 
HHS should enact regulations for all hospitals that participate in Medicare and Medicaid 
to address the harmful effects of medical debt. HHS should also increase oversight and 
transparency concerning denials by private insurance plans and Medicaid managed care 
organizations (Medicaid MCOs).  
 
 
 
102 IRS, Schedule H (Form 990), 2022, https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/f990sh.pdf.  
103 GAO, “IRS Oversight of Hospitals’ Tax-Exempt Status,” at 8, Apr. 26, 2023, https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-23-
106777.pdf.   
104 The New York Times, “This Nonprofit Health System Cuts Off Patients with Medical Debt,” June 1, 
2023, https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/01/business/allina-health-hospital-debt.html (detailing how Allina Health, a 
nonprofit with revenue of over $4 billion annually, denies services to patients with medical debt, including children 
and those with chronic illnesses like diabetes and depression).   
105 New York Times, “They Were Entitled to Free Care. Hospitals Hounded Them to Pay,” Dec. 15, 2022 
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/09/24/business/nonprofit-hospitals-poor-patients.html (noting that some patients 
“had to cut back on groceries to pay what Providence [health system] claimed they owed”); 
NPR, “When Hospitals Sue For Unpaid Bills, It Can Be ‘Ruinous’ For Patients,” June 27, 2019 
https://www.kcur.org/2019-06-27/when-hospitals-sue-for-unpaid-bills-it-can-be-ruinous-for-patients (quoting one 
Mary Washington patient as stating: “I literally have no food in my house because they’re garnishing my check.”). 

 
20
A. Conditions of Participation to Address Medical Debt 
 
HHS, through the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), should enact 
Conditions of Participation related to medical debt. Specifically, CMS should: (1) require 
screening of all patients for eligibility for financial assistance, unless the patient declines 
screening; (2) prohibit the most aggressive collections actions; and (3) require hospitals to notify 
patients when their debt has been determined to be uncollectible.  
 
CMS may establish requirements for Medicare- and Medicaid-participating hospitals that 
are “necessary in the interest of the health and safety of individuals who are furnished services in 
the institution.”106 Notably, CMS does not require specific legislation to enact additional 
requirements for hospitals as Conditions of Participation. For instance, after the 1999 Institute of 
Medicine report on preventable medical errors that generated significant attention, CMS 
promulgated a set of Conditions of Participation on the Quality Assessment and Performance 
Improvement (QAPI) program.107 Similarly, after a Presidential Memorandum on Hospital 
Visitation, CMS promulgated a set of Conditions of Participation related to hospital visitation.108 
 
Today, it would be appropriate for CMS to open a rulemaking for Conditions of 
Participation related to medical debt and hospital collections practices. The Biden Administration 
has directed agencies to consider “policies or practices that help reduce the burden of medical 
debt on households.”109 The Administration has also emphasized that medical debt directly 
affects health because many individuals with medical debt avoid seeking medical care.110 
Further, medical debt also exacerbates existing disparities that this Administration has pledged to 
address,111 as Black and Latino individuals are significantly more likely to carry medical debt.112 
Finally, we note that hospital collections practices do not just impact uninsured or 
underinsured patients with private insurance. Hospital collections practices also directly impact 
Medicare beneficiaries. This is because, to claim reimbursement for Medicare bad debt, hospitals 
must engage in similar collections practices for collecting Medicare deductibles and coinsurance 
amounts as they do for comparable amounts owed by non-Medicare patients.113 For instance, this 
 
106 42 U.S.C. § 1395x(e)(9) (Medicare); 42 CFR § 440.10(1)(3)(iii) (Medicaid).   
107 68 Fed. Reg. 16, at 3435 (Jan. 24, 2003).    
108 75 Fed. Reg. 223 (Nov. 19, 2010). 
109 Executive Order on Continuing to Strengthen Americans’ Access to Affordable, Quality Health Coverage, 
Section 2(f), April 5, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2022/04/05/executive-
order-on-continuing-to-strengthen-americans-access-to-affordable-quality-health-
coverage/?msclkid=887ba3d9b67111ec81e80c7ddd11167b. 
110 Fact Sheet: The Biden Administration Announces New Actions to Lessen the Burden of Medical Debt and 
Increase Consumer Protection, April 22, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2022/04/11/fact-sheet-the-biden-administration-announces-new-actions-to-lessen-the-burden-of-medical-
debt-and-increase-consumer-protection/. 
111 Executive Order 13985, Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the 
Federal Government, Jan. 20, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/20/executive-order-advancing-racial-equity-and-support-for-underserved-communities-through-the-
federal-government/. 
112 CFPB, “Medical Debt Burden in the United States,” at 3, February 2022, 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_medical-debt-burden-in-the-united-
states_report_2022-03.pdf. 
113 42 CFR § 413.89(e)(2)(A)(1) (collections efforts required for non-indigent Medicare beneficiaries).   

 
21
may require hospitals to send Medicare accounts to collections agencies if they take these actions 
against comparable non-Medicare patients.114 
To protect patients from harmful collections practices, CMS should promulgate 
Conditions of Participation that require hospitals to screen all patients for financial assistance 
eligibility, unless the patient declines screening. These Conditions of Participation should also 
prohibit: (1) denying or delaying necessary medical care because of outstanding medical bills; 
(2) garnishing wages; and (3) placing liens or foreclosing on patients’ primary residences. 
Finally, these Conditions of Participation should require hospitals to notify patients when their 
debt is written off as uncollectible so that patients do not needlessly avoid care due to a fear of 
collection actions. 
B. Increase Transparency and Oversight of Insurance Denials 
 
Insurance denials are frequent, both in private coverage and in Medicaid managed care. 
Such denials result in unexpected costs to patients and medical debt, losses for providers, and 
reduced access to care. HHS should require additional reporting on these practices in private 
coverage, which the agency has clear authority to do. HHS should also require state oversight 
and external reviews of denials by Medicaid managed care organizations (MCOs).   
 
Health insurance denials are increasing.115 Cigna, which covers or administers health 
plans for 18 million individuals in the United States116 (including expanding marketplace 
coverage117), implemented an automatic system that allows its doctors to reject claims without 
even opening the patient file.118 Over a period of two months, Cigna doctors denied over 300,000 
claims using this method, spending an average of 1.2 seconds on each one.119  
 
Many Medicaid MCOs appear to be similarly rejecting or delaying claims in bulk. This 
has significant equity implications because Medicaid MCOs cover nearly three quarters of 
 
114 CMS, “Medicare Program; Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment Systems for Acute Care Hospitals and the 
Long-Term Care Hospital Prospective Payment System and Final Policy Changes and Fiscal Year 2021 Rates; 
Quality Reporting and Medicare and Medicaid Promoting Interoperability Programs Requirements for Eligible 
Hospitals and Critical Access Hospitals,” 85 Fed. Reg. 182 at 58994 (Sept. 18, 2020) (“If a provider elects to refer 
its non-Medicare accounts a collection agency, the provider must similarly refer its Medicare accounts of ‘like 
amount.’”).  
115 PBS, “Analysis: Health insurance claim denials are on the rise, to the detriment of patients,” May 28, 2023, 
https://www.pbs.org/newshour/health/analysis-health-insurance-claim-denials-are-on-the-rise-to-the-detriment-of-
patients.  
116 The Cigna Group, “Cigna Reports Strong Fourth Quarter and Full Year 2022 Results, Establishes 2023 Guidance 
and Increases Dividend,” Feb. 3, 2023, https://newsroom.thecignagroup.com/2023-2-3-Cigna-Reports-Strong-
Fourth-Quarter-and-Full-Year-2022-Results-Establishes-2023-Guidance-and-Increases-Dividend.  
117 Cigna Healthcare, “Cigna Grows ACA Marketplace Presence, Giving More Customers and Communities Access 
to Quality, Cost-Effective Care,” Aug. 29, 2022, https://newsroom.cigna.com/2022-08-29-Cigna-Grows-ACA-
Marketplace-Presence,-Giving-More-Customers-and-Communities-Access-to-Quality,-Cost-Effective-
Care#assets_all.  
118 ProPublica, “How Cigna Saves Millions by Having Its Doctors Reject Claims Without Reading Them,” March 
25, 2023, https://www.propublica.org/article/cigna-pxdx-medical-health-insurance-rejection-claims.  
119 Id.  

 
22
Medicaid beneficiaries,120 and half of Medicaid MCO enrollees are people of color.121 One 
Medicaid MCO employed a “denial nurse” who felt pressured to uphold most of the preliminary 
rejections she reviewed, explaining: “If it was a high-dollar case, they tried to deny it.”122 With 
another Medicaid MCO, California state officials determined that beneficiaries were “in 
imminent danger of not receiving medically necessary health services because [the MCO] is not 
timely processing requests for services.”123  
 
In practice, many individuals with health insurance do not actually have effective 
coverage. For instance, in 2021, one marketplace insurer’s denial rate was 49 percent for in-
network claims.124 Similarly, some Medicaid MCOs denied more than 25 percent of prior 
authorization requests.125 HHS should address these increasing claims denials, both in private 
coverage and among Medicaid MCOs. We provide suggestions below for actions in both areas.  
 
1. Private Coverage 
 
HHS has statutory authority to require detailed claims data reporting from marketplace 
plans, non-grandfathered group plans, and health insurers offering group or individual 
coverage.126 As of 2018, more than 92 percent of individuals with private health insurance were 
covered by plans that should be required to comply with these reporting requirements.127 HHS 
should fully implement these requirements and increase transparency for consumers.  
Under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), the information that must be reported to HHS and 
made available to the public includes:  
 
• Claims payment policies and practices; 
• Data on enrollment and disenrollment; 
• Data on the number of claims that are denied; 
• Data on rating practices; 
 
120 KFF Health News, “Coverage Denied: Medicaid Patients Suffer as Layers of Private Companies Profit,” Jan 3, 
2019, https://kffhealthnews.org/news/coverage-denied-medicaid-patients-suffer-as-layers-of-private-companies-
profit/.  
121 HHS OIG, “High Rates of Prior Authorization Denials by Some Plans and Limited State Oversight Raise 
Concerns About Access to Care in Medicaid Managed Care,” OEI-09-19-00350, at 1, July 2023, 
https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/OEI-09-19-00350.pdf. 
122 KFF Health News, “Coverage Denied: Medicaid Patients Suffer as Layers of Private Companies Profit,” Jan 3, 
2019. 
123 California Department of Health Care Services, “SynerMed Corrective Action Plan,” Nov. 17, 2017, 
https://californiahealthline.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2017/11/synermed-corrective-action-plan-nov-17.pdf 
124 KFF, “Claims Denials and Appeals in ACA Marketplace Plans in 2021,” https://www.kff.org/private-
insurance/issue-brief/claims-denials-and-appeals-in-aca-marketplace-plans/.  
125 HHS OIG, High Rates of Prior Authorization Denials by Some Plans and Limited State Oversight Raise 
Concerns About Access to Care in Medicaid Managed Care,” OEI-09-19-00350, at 1, July 2023, 
https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/OEI-09-19-00350.pdf.  
126 Affordable Care Act § 1311(e)(3) (authority to require reporting from plans seeking certification as Qualified 
Health Plans) and § 2715A (requiring group health plans and health insurance issuers offering group or individual 
coverage to comply with the reporting requirements in § 1311(e)(3)); CMS, Transparency in Coverage, 
https://www.qhpcertification.cms.gov/s/Transparency%20in%20Coverage.  
127 Department of the Treasury, Department of Labor, and Department of Health and Human Services, Transparency 
in Coverage, 85 Fed. Reg. 219, at 72159 n.1 (Nov. 12, 2020).  

 
23
• Information on cost-sharing and payments for out-of-network coverage;  
• Information on enrollee and participant rights; and 
• Other information as determined appropriate by the Secretary.128 
 
HHS has not fully implemented these requirements, however. First, reporting is only 
currently required for Qualified Health Plans (QHPs) offered on HealthCare.gov, which cover 
less than 10 percent of people with private health insurance.129 Second, even for these federal 
marketplace plans, HHS does not collect data on all of the enumerated fields.130 Third, HHS has 
not required any other information that would improve oversight, such as data on claims denials 
for specific services or prior authorization denials.131  
 
To address the frequency of claims denials in private health insurance, HHS should: (1) 
require reporting for all plans covered by the ACA’s transparency requirements; (2) require 
reporting on all fields enumerated by the ACA and specify additional information to be included, 
such as claims denials for specific services and prior authorization denials; (3) exercise oversight 
over plans that appear to be improperly denying claims; and (4) develop tools for consumers to 
compare denial rates among plans.  
 
2. Medicaid MCOs 
The Office of Inspector General (OIG) for HHS recently provided recommendations for 
HHS to increase oversight of Medicaid MCO denials. We urge HHS to use implement these 
measures: (1) require States to review the appropriateness of a sample of Medicaid MCO prior 
authorization denials regularly; (2) require States to collect data on Medicaid MCO prior 
authorization decisions; (3) issue guidance to States on the use of Medicaid MCO prior 
authorization data for oversight; (4) require States to implement automatic external medical 
reviews of upheld Medicaid MCO prior authorization denials; and (5) work with States on 
actions to identify and address Medicaid MCOs that may be issuing inappropriate prior 
authorization denials.132 
Conclusion 
 
 
We thank the Agencies for their attention to medical payment products and their 
coordinated approach. Respectfully, we also urge the Agencies to collaborate in addressing 
additional underlying causes of medical debt. Working together, these Agencies can greatly 
increase access to affordable care and financial stability for families.  
 
128 Affordable Care Act § 1311(e)(3) (authority to require reporting from plans seeking certification as Qualified 
Health Plans) and § 2715A (requiring group health plans and health insurance issuers offering group or individual 
coverage to comply with the reporting requirements in § 1311(e)(3)); CMS, Transparency in Coverage, 
https://www.qhpcertification.cms.gov/s/Transparency%20in%20Coverage.  
129 ProPublica, “How Often Do Health Insurers Say No to Patients? No One Knows,” June 28, 2023; KFF, Claims 
Denials and Appeals in ACA Marketplace Plans in 2021, Feb. 9, 2023.  
130 Id.  
131 Id.  
132 HHS OIG, High Rates of Prior Authorization Denials by Some Plans and Limited State Oversight Raise 
Concerns About Access to Care in Medicaid Managed Care,” OEI-09-19-00350, at 17-19, July 2023.  
 

 
24
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide these comments, and we welcome further 
discussion about our recommendations. Please feel free to contact Mona Shah at 
mshah@communitycatalyst.org, who can connect you to any of the undersigned organizations or 
facilitate a group conversation.  
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
ABC for Health, Inc. 
ACA Consumer Advocacy 
The AIDS Institute 
Alliance for a Healthy Kansas 
Americans for Financial Reform Education Fund 
California Pan-Ethnic Health Network 
Casa de Salud 
Catalyst Miami 
Central Florida Jobs with Justice 
Center for Health Progress 
Center for Popular Democracy 
Children’s Action Alliance  
Citizen Action of Wisconsin 
Civil Justice, Inc. 
Community Catalyst 
The Children's Partnership 
Colorado Center on Law and Policy 
Colorado Consumer Health Initiative 
Colorado Immigrants Rights Coalition (CIRC) 
Community Service Society of NY 
Consumers for Affordable Health Care 
CT Health Policy Project 
Debt Collective 
Florida Health Justice Project 
Georgia Equality 
Georgia Watch 
Health Access California 
Health Care Voices 
Health Equity Solutions, Inc. 
Health Law Advocates 
Illinois Coalition for Immigrant and Refugee Rights 
Innovation for Justice 
Justice in Aging 
Kairos Center for Religions, Rights and Social Justice 
Kentucky Voices for Health 
Legal Aid Justice Center 
Legal Council for Health Justice 
Mano a Mano Family Resource Center 

 
25
Michigan Disability Rights Coalition 
MS Black Women's Roundtable 
Mujeres Latinas en Accion 
National Consumer Law Center (on behalf of its low-income clients) 
National Council of Jewish Women, Pennsylvania 
National Disability Rights Network (NDRN) 
New Jersey Citizen Action 
New Mexico Center on Law & Poverty 
New York State Council of Churches 
Northwest Harvest 
Northwest Health Law Advocates 
Pennsylvania Health Access Network 
People Power United 
Protect Our Healthcare Coalition RI 
Public Counsel 
Service Employees International Union, Local 49 
Special Needs & Parent Support Services of LA, LLC 
South Carolina Appleseed Legal Justice Center 
Southwest Georgia Project for Community Education, Inc. 
Southwest Suburban Immigrant Project 
Southern Vermont Area Health Education Center 
SOWEGA Rising 
Third Way 
Tzedek DC 
UHCAN Ohio 
UnidosUS 
La Union del Pueblo Entero 
Virginia Coalition of Latino Organizations 
Virginia Interfaith Center for Public Policy 
Virginia Poverty Law Center 
Western Center on Law and Poverty 
Young Invincibles 
 
 
 
 
