 
 
224 N. Desplaines, Suite 300                                  www.americanmedspa.org                                      T :(312) 981-0993 
Chicago, IL 60661                                                   info@americanmedspa.org                                      F :(888) 827-8860 
August 29, 2023 
Director Chopra: 
On behalf of the American Med Spa Association (AmSpa), I am pleased to respond to the Request for Information 
Regarding Medical Payment Products (“RFI”) issued by the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department 
of Treasury, and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (collectively, the “Agencies”).   
AmSpa is a professional trade association with 4,000 members nationwide. Our members consist of medical spas, their 
owners and employees, as well as much of the industry that serves them. AmSpa has been around for more than ten 
years and has a good sense of the issues that face this industry and the patient-base it serves.  
As the Agencies may know, medical spas provide elective, cash-based, non-invasive or minimally invasive aesthetic 
medical procedures designed to improve a patient’s physical appearance. These procedures and treatments can range 
from cosmetic injections such as hyaluronic acid dermal fillers, energy-based skin tightening, to body contouring, to laser 
or light hair removal.  Our members’ patients are looking for high quality care that improves their appearance and their 
confidence. 
AmSpa supports the Agencies’ goal to ensure that patients are treated well by their providers.  Perhaps more than most, 
AmSpa members recognize the need to provide a safe, compliant experience and exceed their patients’ expectations 
every day.  The care our members provide is voluntary and elective – medical spas accept cash for their services, and 
very few collect reimbursements from third-party payors. Since the care itself is discretionary, and patients have choices 
about who they see for care, a medical spa or medical aesthetic practice will not thrive if it does not provide appropriate 
care to its patients, including how it bills for care. And as you can imagine, medical spas need to accept payment 
securely, discretely, and electronically in a variety of different ways to meet the patients’ needs.  
Given the fact that AmSpa members do not provide the types of care described by the Agencies in the RFI (e.g., non-
elective care provided through hospitals), it does not appear the Agencies intend to delve into how patients pay for 
elective procedures, such as those offered through aesthetic practices.  I am not aware of deficiencies in the industry 
relating to billing or financing, and any attempt to regulate how a consumer pays a medical spa or aesthetic practice 
would be misguided. At a minimum, it seems appropriate for elective, cash-based procedures to be separated out from 
any rules regarding payment given that they fall into a distinct category that is very different from the issues addresses 
by the Agencies. 
Having said that, patients put a high value on the ability to use various forms of payment when paying for aesthetic care.  
AmSpa members are pleased to offer their patients the ability to use a variety of payment types because members know 
that each patient has different needs.  While some can pay for care up front with ready funds, many patients need to be 
able to spread the payments for care over time.  This could be through use of a credit card, for example.  While AmSpa 
members generally accept the universally known credit card brands like Visa or American Express, many also accept 
popular products like CareCredit. Our members accept credit cards, including CareCredit, because they know it gives 
their patients the flexibility to get the care they want.  Conversely, if the Agencies restricted patients’ access to credit, 
that would mean that patients would have to put off, delay, or forgo treatment altogether—especially for the services 
AmSpa members provide because they are elective and generally not covered by insurance. 

 
 
224 N. Desplaines, Suite 300                                  www.americanmedspa.org                                      T :(312) 981-0993 
Chicago, IL 60661                                                   info@americanmedspa.org                                      F :(888) 827-8860 
It is also worth noting that most AmSpa members – and indeed most medical spas in the industry as a whole – accept 
deferred interest payments like CareCredit. These programs are very popular and trusted within the industry, and 
AmSpa has not received or heard of any problems or complaints from its members or their patients regarding programs 
like CareCredit. To our knowledge, CareCredit in particular is universally liked, appreciated, and embraced by the 
industry as a way to make elective medical treatments more affordable and easier to obtain.  Although the RFI 
suggested deferred interest financing was somehow problematic, our members’ experience suggests otherwise.  AmSpa 
urges the Agencies to preserve patients’ ability to utilize this financing tool.    
AmSpa appreciates the opportunity to share its views with the Agencies.  Please let me know if I can provide additional 
information or support. 
Sincerely, 
 
Alex R. Thiersch, JD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8/29/23_________________ 
CEO and Founder 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date 
American Med Spa Association (AmSpa) 
312-981-0991 
alex@americanmedspa.org 
 
 
