1 
September 11, 2023 
 
Via www.regulations.gov 
 
Director Rohit Chopra 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau  
1700 G Street, NW  
Washington, DC 20552 
 
Secretary Xavier Becerra 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
7500 Security Boulevard 
Baltimore, MD 21244–1850 
 
Secretary Yellen 
Department of the Treasury 
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20220 
 
Re: Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products,  
CFPB-2023-0038 / CMS-2023-0106 / TREAS-DO-2023-0008 
 
Dear Director Chopra, Secretary Becerra, and Secretary Yellen: 
 
The National Consumer Law Center (NCLC) (on behalf of our low-income clients), Americans 
for Financial Reform Education Fund, and Georgia Watch submit the following comments in 
response to the Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products (RFI) issued by 
the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), the Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS), and the Department of the Treasury (Treasury).1 We appreciate that the CFPB, 
HHS, and Treasury are engaging in an extensive examination of medical payment products and 
their impact on vulnerable consumers. 
 
These comments focus on: 
● Harms to consumers that may result from the use of medical payment products; 
● The need for improved consumer protections through regulatory and legislative changes; 
and 
● The need for further research to better understand the evolving landscape of medical 
payment products. 
 
                                               
1 The Request for Information is posted at https://www.regulations.gov/document/CFPB-2023-0038-0001, 
and published at 88 Fed. Reg. 44,281 (July 12, 2023). These comments were written by NCLC attorneys 
April Kuehnhoff, Chi Chi Wu, Jen Bosco, and Berneta Haynes.  

2 
These comments build on prior reports and comments filed by NCLC. In February 2023, NCLC 
surveyed consumer advocates about client experiences with medical credit cards. The survey 
results were initially shared in response to the CFPB’s Request for Information for its 2023 study 
regarding the consumer credit card market pursuant to the Credit CARD Act (NCLC 2023 
Comments to CARD Act RFI).2 These survey results were also published as a report (Health 
Care Plastic).3 We have attached these documents to the comments as Appendix A and B. 
 
The comments below follow the organization of the RFI and retain the question numbers of the 
relevant sections. Since these comments do not respond to every question, question numbers 
may not proceed in order. 
 
 
1. Responses to General Questions: Market-Level Inquiries 
Q1. What are the benefits, costs, and risks of medical payment products for 
consumers, health care providers, and companies offering these products? 
Risks to consumers using medical payment products include: 
● 
Financing amounts that should be covered by the patient’s existing Medicaid or other 
insurance; 
● 
Financing amounts where the patient should have been screened for Medicaid eligibility; 
● 
Financing inflated amounts due to medical billing errors or chargemaster pricing; 
● 
Financing medical products or procedures that are not undertaken or completed; 
● 
Financing amounts that should be covered by financial assistance; 
● 
Financing amounts that should not have been charged because of the protections of the No 
Surprises Act; 
● 
Financing amounts at a higher rate of interest than would otherwise be available to the 
consumer through other payment options; 
                                               
2 National Consumer Law Center and Consumer Federation of America, Comments in Response to 
CFPB Request for Information Regarding the Consumer Credit Card Market (Apr. 24, 2023), available at: 
https://www.nclc.org/resources/nclc-cfa-comments-in-response-to-cfpb-request-for-information-regarding-
the-consumer-credit-card-market/.  
3 April Kuehnhoff and Chi Chi Wu, National Consumer Law Center, Health Care Plastic: The Risks of 
Medical Credit Cards (Apr. 2023), available at: https://www.nclc.org/resources/health-care-plastic-the-
risks-of-medical-credit-cards/.  

3 
● 
Triggering deferred interest if they are unable to pay off the balance during a promotional 
period; 
● 
Incurring interest on the balance when they could have entered into an interest free payment 
plan with the medical provider; 
● 
Receiving inaccurate information about a medical financial product from medical facility staff; 
● 
Falsification of income by medical providers that qualifies consumers for a larger extension 
of credit than they can afford; 
● 
Being sued by a medical payment product provider; and 
● 
Having negative information about a medical payment product reported on a credit report 
while an account marked as a medical debt would not have been reported due to the 
voluntary measures by the nationwide consumer reporting agencies (CRAs), i.e., Equifax, 
Experian and TransUnion. 
For more information about these and other risks to consumers, see Health Care Plastic. 
 
Q2. What are the terms of medical payment products, including interest 
rates and fees? 
Terms and conditions of different medical payment products can vary significantly between lenders4 
and for different consumers using the same providers depending on the amount financed or the 
repayment details.5 With respect to medical credit cards such as CareCredit, they often have higher 
                                               
4 See, e.g., AccessOne, Choice Agreement and Initial Disclosure (Mar. 2023), available at: 
https://www.myaccessone.com/Applications/ShowDisclosureByClient?companyId=1&clientId=204 (APR 
of up to 18%); Curae, Pricing Information Addendum, available at: https://curae.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/05/Curae-Cardholder-Agreement-and-Pricing-Addendum.pdf (APR of up to 36% 
with a “penalty APR” of 29.99%); Alphaeon Credit, Current Credit Card Agreement (Aug. 2023), available 
at: https://d.comenity.net/ac/alphaeoncosmetic/public/credit-card-agreement (28.99% APR); Citizens 
Bank, PrimaHealth Credit Disclosures (Aug. 2023), available at 
https://www.citizensbank.com/disclosures/primahealth-credit.aspx (29.99% APR; PrimaHealth Credit is 
the platform borrowers use to access their line of credit from Citizens Bank); Bread Financial (Comenity 
Capital Bank), Credit Card Agreements, available at: https://d.comenity.net/ac/credit-card-agreement 
(28.99% APR for HealthiPlan and Dental First; use drop-down menu to select agreements);  MedCredit 
Financial Services, About Us (8% APR), available at: https://medcredit.securedocview.com/Terms.aspx; 
Synchrony Bank, CareCredit Credit Card Account Agreement (June 2023), available at: 
https://www.carecredit.com/YourTerms/ (29.99% APR); Wells Fargo Health Advantage, Credit Card 
Agreement, available at: https://retailservices.wellsfargo.com/pdf/ccra/wells_fargo_health_advantage.pdf.   
5 See, e.g., AccessOne, Choice Agreement and Initial Disclosure (Mar. 2023), available at: 
https://www.myaccessone.com/Applications/ShowDisclosureByClient?companyId=1&clientId=204 (terms 
vary based on the amount financed and how quickly the consumer can repay the balance); Synchrony 
Bank, CareCredit Credit Card Account Agreement (June 2023), available at: 
https://www.carecredit.com/YourTerms/ (some individuals may qualify for deferred interest of 6-24 months 
and where the full balance is paid off during this period they do not have to pay interest on the balance). 

4 
APRs (e.g., 29.99%)6 than a general purpose credit card (e.g., U.S. Prime Rate plus 11.99% or 
20.49%).7 
It is not always easy for consumers to assess or compare the true cost of financing with different 
medical payment products. We provide two examples below of ways that consumers might learn 
about medical payment products and their terms and conditions. 
Example 1 
A consumer without dental insurance goes to the dentist with significant tooth pain. The dentist 
informs the consumer that she needs a root canal but will not proceed unless the consumer pays 
upfront. Someone who works at the dentist’s office informs the consumer that there is interest-free 
financing available for dental procedures like hers without disclosing that the product is a deferred-
interest credit card or explaining how deferred interest works.8 The dentist provides the consumer 
with an iPad to sign up for a CareCredit medical credit card9 while sitting in the dentist’s chair.10 The 
consumer does not receive a copy of the terms and conditions from the dentist’s office.11 Indeed, the 
consumer does not understand that she is applying for a credit card and thinks that she is taking out 
a loan with the dentist’s office.12 After the procedure, the consumer is set up with automatic 
                                               
6 Synchrony Bank, CareCredit Credit Card Account Agreement (June 2023), available at: 
https://www.carecredit.com/YourTerms/.  
7 Citibank, Costco Credit Card Disclosures, available at: 
https://www.citi.com/CRD/PDF/CMA/pricingTables/PIT_PID520-CostcoADA-2.pdf. See also Adam 
McCann and Alina Comoreanu, “WalletHubAverage Credit Card Interest Rates,” WalletHub (Aug. 21, 
2023), available at: https://wallethub.com/edu/cc/average-credit-card-interest-rate/50841 (average credit 
card interest rates 22.60% for new offers and 20.68% for existing accounts); Letter from Senator 
Elizabeth Warren, et al, United States Senate, to Director Rohit Chopra, Consumer Financial Protection 
Bureau (June 29, 2023) available at: 
https://www.warren.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/2023.06.29%20Letter%20to%20CFPB%20re%20medical
%20credit%20cards1.pdf. (“For those patients who are assessed interest, the rates can be much higher 
than the rates paid by the average credit card user. According to Synchrony, borrowers who do not fully 
pay off their cards in the promotional period face an average interest rate of 26.44 percent, with the 
maximum interest rate as high as 29.99 percent. By contrast, the average interest rate across all credit 
cards as of September 2022 was 16.27 percent.”).  
8 See Health Care Plastic at 4, 22 (47% of survey respondents reported that their clients were told that 
credit was 0% interest but was actually deferred interest).  
9 See CareCredit, Using In-Office Devices, available at: 
https://www.carecredit.com/providercenter/resourcescenter/use/device/.  
10 See Health Care Plastic at 24. 
11 See Health Care Plastic at 4 (50% of survey respondents reported that their clients never received 
disclosures about the credit card terms when signing up). Contrast CareCredit, Using In-Office Devices, 
available at: https://www.carecredit.com/providercenter/resourcescenter/use/device/ (stating in the 
Frequently Asked Questions that medical office staff should provide a copy of the paper application with 
the terms and conditions before the consumer begins the application on the in-office device).  
12 See Health Care Plastic at 20-21. 

5 
payments for only the minimum payment amount.13 When she fails to pay the full amount during the 
promotional period as a result of these minimum payments, she is charged retroactively for the 
deferred interest and becomes aware for the first time of the interest rate of 29.99% and late fees.14 
Example 2 
A consumer who is a patient at Atrium Health Wake Forest Baptist might learn about medical 
financing with the medical provider’s partner AccessOne through the medical provider’s Billing and 
Insurance page by following a link called “Patient Financing Through AccessOne.”15 That webpage 
states “AccessOne offers interest-free and low-interest options with lower minimum payments.”16 
This vague information echoes the general information available on AccessOne’s patient website, 
which states “zero to low interest rates.”17  
If the patient clicks through to learn more information about AccessOne,18 the patient can click on 
links for “Payment Plan Benefits,” “Initial Disclosure,” or “Payment Estimator.”  
The “Initial Disclosure” link takes the consumer to the terms and conditions, which disclose an APR 
of 14.25% for “low interest” payment plans with a balance of under $10,000, as well as finance 
                                               
13 See NCLC 2023 Comments to Credit CARD Act RFI at 6-7 (excerpt of CFPB Complaint No. 3848078, 
filed September 16, 2020).  See also Chi Chi Wu, National Consumer Law Center, Deceptive Bargain: 
The Hidden Time Bomb of Deferred Interest Credit Cards at 9 (Dec. 2015) 
www.nclc.org/resources/deceptive-bargain-the-hidden-time-bomb-of-deferred-interest-credit-cards/. 
In some cases, the consumer might know enough to make payments that will pay off the entire 
balance. They may be paying diligently until something happens, e.g., they lose their job and cannot 
make payments. 
14 Synchrony Bank, CareCredit Credit Card Account Agreement (June 2023), available at: 
https://www.carecredit.com/YourTerms/.  
15 This example explores one possible way that the consumer might learn about AccessOne. Other 
methods include: information from the medical provider at the time of service, information in a medical bill, 
and information in a payment portal.  
 
Other medical payment providers also market their products through patient billing portals. Noam 
Levey and Aneri Pattani, “How Banks and Hospitals Are Cashing in When Patients Can’t Pay for Health 
Care,” National Public Radio (Nov. 17, 2022), available at: https://www.npr.org/sections/health-
shots/2022/11/17/1136201685/medical-debt-high-interest-credit-cards-hospitals-profit (“Synchrony, which 
historically marketed its CareCredit cards in patient waiting rooms, is now also inking deals with medical 
systems to enroll patients in loans when they go online to pay bills.”). 
16 Atrium Health Wake Forest Baptist, Patient Financing Through AccessOne, available at: 
https://www.wakehealth.edu/patient-and-family-resources/billing-and-insurance/patient-financing-through-
accessone.  
17 AccessOne, Empowering Patients, available at: https://accessonepay.com/patients/.  
18 AccessOne, Patient Portal, available at: https://www.myaccessone.com/wfbh. 

6 
charges, and late fees.19 Moreover, the document discloses that “APR will vary with the market 
based on the Prime Rate” and that the APR “will not fall below 8% or exceed a maximum rate of 
18%.” These disclosures are far less conspicuous than the “interest free” and “zero interest” 
promotions listed elsewhere. 
The “Payment Estimator” link takes the consumer to a form to calculate the amount of monthly 
payments and the number of payments. Here is a screenshot of the information produced using 
$9,000 as the amount to finance. 
 
The information presented by the “Payment Estimator” does not specify the relevant APR for the low 
interest plan, nor does it alert the consumer that the interest rate is variable. Only patients that use 
the Payment Estimator learn that if they cannot afford to pay $375 per month, they cannot access 
the interest free plan. 
In 2022, investigative journalists highlighted the percentage of patients enrolled in AccessOne 
payment plans that pay the highest available interest rate at four different hospital systems: 
● 
UNC Health – on February 15, 2022, 46% of enrolled patients were in the plan with the 
highest available interest rate (13%), which was up from 9% of enrolled patients in February 
2020; 
● 
Atrium Health – “as many as half” of enrolled patients were in the high-interest plan in 2021; 
● 
AU Health – two-thirds of enrolled patients were paying the highest interest rate in January 
2022; and  
                                               
19 AccessOne, Choice Agreement and Initial Disclosure (Mar. 2023), available at: 
https://www.myaccessone.com/Applications/ShowDisclosureByClient?companyId=1&clientId=204. 

7 
● 
University of Kansas Health System – “shield patients from interest” in their contract with 
AccessOne.20 
 
Q3. How much debt do consumers carry on medical credit cards and loans 
in total, and what is the average individual debt level? 
In a letter from Wells Fargo to Senator Warren on January 23, 2023, Wells Fargo reported that the 
Wells Fargo Health Advantage Card had an annual volume of less than $200 million with fewer than 
65,000 active cardholders.21 That letter also reported that at the end of November 2022, the average 
balance was just under $3,000.22 
In a letter from Synchrony to Senators Warren, Markey, Sanders, Murphy, and Brown on January 
26, 2023, Synchrony reported that as of September 30, 2022 there were 6.3 million active 
CareCredit accounts and that the average balance at that time was $1,779.23 This represents a total 
of more than $11 billion in medical debt. 
We are unaware of equivalent publicly-available data on other medical payment products. 
 
Q4. How concentrated is the medical payment product market, and what 
role do private equity firms play in this market? 
According to one report on the medical patient financing industry, Synchrony Financial’s CareCredit 
Card has an 18.4% market share and LendingClub has a 1.3% market share.24  
At least one medical payment company - AccessOne - is reported to be majority owned by a private 
equity investor - Frontier Capital.25  
                                               
20 Noam Levey and Aneri Pattani, “How Banks and Hospitals Are Cashing in When Patients Can’t Pay for 
Health Care,” National Public Radio (Nov. 17, 2022), available at: https://www.npr.org/sections/health-
shots/2022/11/17/1136201685/medical-debt-high-interest-credit-cards-hospitals-profit. 
21 Companies’ Responses to Senators’ 2022 Questions, available at: 
https://www.warren.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Medical%20Credit%20Card%20Companies%20Response
s.pdf.  
22 Id. 
23 Id. 
24 IbisWorld, Medical Patient Financing 26 (Dec. 2021). 
25 Noam Levey and Aneri Pattani, “How Banks and Hospitals Are Cashing in When Patients Can’t Pay for 
Health Care,” National Public Radio (Nov. 17, 2022), available at: https://www.npr.org/sections/health-
shots/2022/11/17/1136201685/medical-debt-high-interest-credit-cards-hospitals-profit 

8 
 
Q5. Are there specific populations or geographic regions that experience 
disproportionately higher utilization of medical payment products? 
Health Care Plastic documented several problematic stories that appear to involve older consumers: 
● "Seniors were being told that the financing agreement was a repayment agreement with 
the dental office. They did not understand that it was an extension of credit." - Legal 
services attorney from California. 
● "[N]ever took 1 of 2 dentures, yet full amount for both dentures was charged by doctor 
and put on card; took many attempts, phone/letters, in person follow-up to get that 
corrected" - Legal services attorney from Indiana. 
● "[M]any people also report not getting the procedures (or things like dentures) which they 
were charged for" - Legal services attorney from Massachusetts. 
● “One of our cases: A 70+ year old senior . . . is targeted by a Facebook advertisement 
for a bogus ‘Smile Grant’ program (https://smilegrantprogram.com/apply-for-grants). She 
has been looking for dentures that fit her. She clicks on the targeted ad and is directly 
contacted soon after by a local dentist office. She goes in for ‘free consultation’ and is 
given documents to sign while in the dentists chair . . . She is scheduled for two 
additional appointments, during which she is pressured to pay a deposit of $2,000. She 
then receives a notice in the mail from Proceed Finance, which says that she has taken 
out a loan for $20,000. The promised "grant" appears to just be an illusory discount after 
an upsell for the procedure.” - Legal services attorney from California   
● “Many are Medi-Cal recipients who were upsold services by their Medi-Cal accepting 
dentists, who told them that they need implants (not covered by Denti-Cal) or porcelain 
crowns (not covered by Denti-Cal).” - Legal services attorney from California. [Although 
not directly referencing seniors, survey respondents explained that consumers were 
frequently steered to uncovered dental implants instead of dentures.] 
Health Care Plastic also documented survey responses involving practices in immigrant 
communities or involving clients with limited English proficiency: 
● 
“Based on our experiences working with low-income populations and populations with limited 
English proficiency, we suspect that many families across PA are susceptible to the 
predatory practices employed by medical credit cards. We already see numerous cases 
where they are never informed of financial assistance, and if they are, they are only told to 
sign papers and wait. It would not be a surprise if they are being signed up for medical credit 
cards under the guise of a payment plan.” - Health care advocate from Pennsylvania. 
● 
“We see [medical credit cards] fairly frequently from dentists in low income areas of East 
Boston mostly immigrant patients with emergency dental needs.” - Legal services attorney 
from Massachusetts. 

9 
● 
One advocate who described consumers being upsold to products not covered by Medi-Cal 
explained that the dentists engaging in this practice, “are often mom and pop shops located 
in immigrant communities and serve Spanish-speaking populations.” - Legal services 
attorney from California. 
More than a third of survey respondents (38%) reported that their clients were only presented with 
information about medical credit cards in English even though the client has limited English 
proficiency.26 
 
Q6. What are the health equity impacts of medical payment products and 
related billing and collection policies and practices? 
Q6(i). Do medical payment products affect members of specific underserved 
communities differently, including members of Tribal communities and 
geographically isolated communities? 
While we are not aware of any statistics about the impact of medical payment products on specific 
communities, it is important to learn more about the impact of medical payment products on different 
communities because medical debt disproportionately impacts communities of color.27 Additionally, 
communities of color are more likely to be uninsured.28 Lack of insurance or high out-of-pocket costs 
for those who are insured may increase the likelihood of turning to medical payment products to 
cover medical bills. 
 
Q8. What incentives do financial services companies offer health care 
providers, including revenue-sharing or other financial or non-financial 
incentives? 
Health care providers generally pay a fee to lenders to participate in their medical credit card 
programs, in the form of a percentage of the amount financed. In a letter from Wells Fargo to 
Senator Warren on January 23, 2023, Wells Fargo reported that: 
                                               
26 Health Care Plastic at 4. 
27 See, e.g., Urban Institute, Debt in America: An Interactive Map (last updated June 23, 2022), available 
at: https://apps.urban.org/features/debt-interactive-map/?type=medical&variable=medcoll; Berneta 
Haynes, National Consumer Law Center, The Racial Health and Wealth Gap: Impact of Medical Debt on 
Black Families (Mar. 2022), available at: https://www.nclc.org/resources/the-racial-health-and-wealth-
gap/.  
28 See, e.g., Samantha Artiga, et al., KFF, Health Coverage by Race and Ethnicity, 2010-2021 (Dec 20, 
2022), available at: https://www.kff.org/racial-equity-and-health-policy/issue-brief/health-coverage-by-
race-and-ethnicity/.  

10 
As with other credit cards, providers agree to pay Wells Fargo a percentage of the amount 
financed to participate in the program (fee). Our standard agreement with a provider does 
not contain financial incentives, although a handful of providers pay a reduced fee based on 
volume.29  
The CFPB’s report on medical credit cards noted that, “[e]stimates from 2008 put CareCredit’s 
processing fee rate at 13.5 percent. This is often significantly higher than credit card merchant rates 
of $2 or less.30 
In a letter from Synchrony to Senators Warren, Markey, Sanders, Murphy, and Brown on January 
26, 2023, Synchrony reported that: 
CareCredit’s agreements with providers are confidential. However, the agreements do not 
include provisions for paid endorsements, nor do they have provisions for referral fees.31  
 
Q9. How do medical payment products and health insurance coverage 
interact?  
Health Care Plastics discusses consumers who were signed up for medical credit cards despite 
having insurance, including Medicaid.32 The report also documents problems with upselling and 
steering to products that were not covered by Medicaid.33 
 
Q9(ii). Does a patient's use of a medical payment product exempt them from certain 
consumer protections, provider requirements, or group health plan or health 
insurance issuer requirements? 
Financial Assistance 
                                               
29 Companies’ Responses to Senators’ 2022 Questions, available at: 
https://www.warren.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Medical%20Credit%20Card%20Companies%20Response
s.pdf.  
30Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Medical Credit Cards and Financing Plans 10, n.32 (May 2023) 
(citing Consumer Reports, “Credit Cards and Finance Lines for Medical Care” (July 2008)), available at: 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_medical-credit-cards-and-
financing-plans_2023-05.pdf.  
31 Id. 
32 Health Care Plastic at 17-18. 
33 Id. at 17-18, 27. 

11 
Once a consumer has paid a medical debt using a medical credit card (or a standard credit card), it 
will likely be difficult to get the medical provider to process any financial assistance application or 
reimburse any amount that should have been covered by financial assistance.34  
In a letter from Synchrony to Senators Warren, Markey, Sanders, Murphy, and Brown on January 
26, 2023, Synchrony reported in response to a question asking if “CareCredit bar[s] hospitals from 
billing patients who may be eligible for free reduced-price care”: 
Payment card networks do not have a role in determining which patients a hospital bills or 
how much they are billed for particular components of their care . . .  
Our template multiyear agreement for health systems contains the following recital: 
“The [CareCredit] Program is designed to be offered to Health System patients pre-
service, at point of service, and post-service, and operate alongside (and not part of 
or in lieu of) Health System’s existing patient assistance or financial assistance 
programs.” 
According to its contractual agreement with one hospital system, AccessOne provided different 
Patient Payment Options for those eligible for the hospital’s financial assistance program.”35 We 
provide a screenshot of the relevant terms below. It is unclear why someone who is eligible for 
financial assistance is entering into any kind of repayment agreement. 
                                               
34 See Dollar For, Comments in Response to Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment 
Products (Sept. 11, 2023), available at: https://www.regulations.gov/docket/CFPB-2023-0038/comments 
(collecting consumer stories).  
35 AccessOne Medical Charge Account Agreement between AccessOne MedCard, Inc. and AU Health 
System, Inc. ¶ 1.5(a)(iii), Appx. C (Oct. 7, 2019), available at: 
https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/23897552/accessone-au-health-contract.pdf. See also 
AccessOne Medical Charge Account Agreement between AccessOne MedCard, Inc. and UNC Health 
Care System  ¶ 1.5(a)(iii) (June 12, 2019), available at: 
https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/23897548/accessone-unc-contract.pdf (providing for interest-
free, fixed monthly payments in any amount determined by hospital; plan designated for those eligible for 
hospital financial assistance). 

12 
 
Insurance Appeal 
A consumer who has paid for health care services using a medical payment product could still 
appeal an insurance coverage denial. However, a patient often needs letters or documentation from 
providers to win an insurance appeal, and a provider who has already been paid may be less willing 
to dedicate additional time to helping the patient appeal. Also, even if the patient prevailed, it would 
be more complicated to get reimbursed since a successful appeal may mean that the insurer would 
send payment to the provider, and the patient would need to be reimbursed by the provider. 
Moreover, the consumer may have paid a higher amount (i.e., chargemaster prices) than the 
negotiated lower rates that the insurer pays the provider. The consumer also might have incurred 
interest or fees due to missed payments to the medical payment product provider. Thus, even a 
successful insurance appeal might not make the consumer whole. 
Credit Reporting 
Falling behind on a medical credit card payment will also impact a consumer’s credit score since 
credit card companies typically furnish information on a monthly basis to one or more credit bureaus 
soon after the account is opened.36 In contrast, Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion have voluntarily 
decided to wait one year before reporting medical debts. They also eliminated unpaid medical debts 
                                               
36 Cf. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Quarterly Consumer Credit Trends: Payment Amount 
Furnishing & Consumer Reporting 7 (Nov. 2020) (discussing furnishing practices by credit card issuers), 
available at: https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_quarterly-consumer-credit-
trends_report_2020-11.pdf.  

13 
of less than $500 from credit reports in 2023 and removed paid medical debts.37 Additionally, 
VantageScore announced that credit scoring models will not take medical debt into consideration.38 
As a result of these changes, past due medical debt that is charged to a credit card, including a 
specialty medical credit card, and reported delinquent by the card issuer will likely have a more 
negative impact on someone’s credit report and credit score than medical debt furnished to a credit 
bureau by a provider, debt collector, or debt buyer. Such impact could occur as soon as 30 days 
after the first missed payment, unlike the one year grace period for other medical debts. 
No Surprises Act and Other Protections Against Balance Billing 
The No Surprises Act protects consumers from surprise medical bills, i.e., bills from out-of-network 
healthcare providers for which the consumer’s insurer did not pay the full amount charged by the 
provider.39 The Act bans surprise bills for emergency services, for non-emergency services by out-
of-network providers who work at an in-network facility, and air ambulance services from out-of-
network providers. Similar protections exist for Medicaid and Medicare patients.40 However, if a 
consumer pays a surprise medical bill using a medical financing product, they will lose these 
protections against balance billing and surprise medical bills.   
Some patients might be able to withhold payment for an illegal surprise bill under 15 U.S.C. § 1666i 
(right to assert claims and defenses against a merchant). However, as discussed in the response to 
Question 12.ii, such challenges could prove difficult for consumers. 
 
Q11. What are some best practices for health care providers who offer 
medical payment products in avoiding adverse financial and health impacts 
for patients? 
Providers should inform consumers of treatment options that are covered under their insurance, 
including Medicaid, and not steer them to uncovered options. Providers should screen the patient for 
government insurance eligibility. If they are not eligible, providers should ideally connect the patient 
with their state’s health care marketplace or health care navigators. 
                                               
37 Experian, Press Release: Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion Support U.S. Consumers With Changes 
to Medical Collection Debt Reporting (Mar. 18, 2022), available at: 
https://www.experianplc.com/media/latest-news/2022/equifax-experian-and-transunion-support-us-
consumers-with-changes-to-medical-collection-debt-reporting/.  
38 VantageScore, Press Release: MAJOR CREDIT SCORE NEWS: VantageScore Removes Medical 
Debt Collection Records From Latest Scoring Models (Aug. 10, 2022), available at: 
https://www.vantagescore.com/major-credit-score-news-vantagescore-removes-medical-debt-collection-
records-from-latest-scoring-models.  
39 No Surprises Act of the 2021 Consolidated Appropriations Act, Pub. L. No. 116-260, § 109, 134 Stat. 
2578 (Dec. 27, 2020), 
40 42 U.S.C. § 1396a(a)(25)(C); 42 C.F.R. § 447.15 (Medicaid); 42 U.S.C. § 1395cc(a)(1)(A)(Medicare). 

14 
Providers and their staff should not be involved in the actual application process for consumers 
signing up for medical payment products since this can raise several problems, such as failing to 
make adequate Truth-in-Lending disclosures or encouraging fraud like falsifying consumer income in 
credit applications.41  
Instead, providers that want to offer information about medical payment products should be limited to 
referring consumers to a list of different medical payment products that consumers might want to 
consider and reminding consumers that their bank or credit union may also provide additional 
options. These lists can provide links where interested consumers can apply directly with the credit 
card company or other lender. 
If providers do offer medical payment products (or a list of possible medical payment products), they 
should do all of the following before offering such products (or a list of such products): 
● 
Apply all insurance to the medical bill;  
● 
Wait for any insurance appeals to be processed;  
● 
Assist patients without insurance in connecting with resources to help them apply for free or 
reduced cost medical insurance programs; 
● 
Screen all patients for eligibility for any charity care or financial assistance and inform people 
who are found eligible that all (or a portion) of the costs will be covered; 
● 
Provide information about how to apply for financial assistance to those not pre-screened as 
eligible; 
● 
Allow patients that demonstrate eligibility for other means tested benefits (e.g., food stamps) 
to qualify for any financial assistance without submitting a formal application; and 
● 
Provide information about payment plans with the provider that may be accessed without 
signing up for a medical payment product. 
Providers should not offer information about medical payment products at times when the consumer 
will have diminished capacity to consent (e.g., in the emergency room, while sedated, when in 
significant pain, during a mental health crisis, etc.).42 
Even after a consumer makes a payment (whether or not a medical product was used), the medical 
provider should refund any patient who later is determined to be eligible for full or partial financial 
assistance. 
 
                                               
41 See Health Care Plastic at 26. 
42 See id. at 24. 

15 
Q11(ii). What actions should the agencies take to develop and encourage uptake of 
these established best practices? 
HHS should promote these best practices by conducting research and issuing a report that identifies 
these best practices and outlines their implementation. 
HHS should also issue guidance to remind providers that offering medical credit cards or payment 
products to patients with certain public insurance (e.g., Medicaid, CHIP, Medicare/Medicaid dual-
eligibles, etc.) may violate rules that prohibit balance billing of these patients, or other HHS rules or 
provider agreements.  
 
Q12. To what extent are patients using medical payment products to pay 
bills that are incorrect, or that could be covered or defrayed by lower-cost 
alternatives? 
As noted above in response to question 9, Health Care Plastic discusses consumers who were 
signed up for medical credit cards despite having insurance, including Medicaid.43 The report also 
documents problems with upselling and steering to products that were not covered by Medicaid, 
when an alternative procedure would have been covered.44 
 
Q12(i). What billing errors may patients commonly encounter? 
KFF’s recent Health Care Data Survey provides data about billing errors: 
The KFF Survey found that a majority (53%) of adults with health care debt, and 43% of all 
adults, say they have received a medical or dental bill they thought contained an error. [ ] 
About two-thirds of these adults say the error involved being billed for something that should 
have been covered by their health insurance. Other provider errors were also reported, 
including being billed for services never received or for bills that had already been paid. 
The vast majority (79%) of adults with health care debt who say they received a bill that 
contained an error took some action to dispute the mistake with their insurer or provider, and 
in many cases they succeeded in resolving the mistake. However, 51% of all adults with 
health care debt who received an erroneous bill either could not successfully fix the disputed 
bill or did not even try to dispute it in the first place. [ ] In addition, about a third (32%) of 
adults with health care debt who received a bill they thought had an error say they have had 
                                               
43 Id. at 17-18. 
44 Id. at 17-18, 27. 

16 
a disputed bill sent to collections, which can have a significant impact on their credit score 
and their future access to credit, loans and financing.45 
 
Q12(ii). How does using a medical payment product affect patients' rights to dispute 
incorrect bills? 
If the medical payment product is a credit card, the consumer should have the right to withhold 
payment by raising claims and defenses that they have against the medical provider (i.e., the 
merchant).46  Such claims may be based on services that were never provided, or that were shoddy 
or incomplete, as well as billing errors. However, such disputes may be challenging for consumers to 
raise, especially for consumers with limited English proficiency or those with limited literacy or 
education. There could possibly be problems in resolving disputes when the credit card lender and 
the provider have a referral relationship.   
To prevent some of these issues, as discussed below, we recommend that the CFPB prohibit 
lenders from placing a charge on an account or issuing funds before a medical procedure is 
completed or the medical product is delivered. Medical credit card lenders should also inform 
consumers that they have the right to cancel financing arrangements with no penalty before 
beginning the procedure 
We also recommend that the CFPB remind credit card lenders that patients are entitled to withhold 
payment based on billing errors or shoddy services, and that they must conduct a reasonable 
investigation of such disputes; the Bureau should require the lenders to provide special outreach 
materials informing patients of this right. The CFPB should require that medical payment product 
companies cease working with medical providers that have a pattern of engaging in abusive 
practices. 
 
                                               
45 Karen Pollitz and Kaye Pestaina, KFF, Could Consumer Assistance be Helpful to People Facing 
Medical Debt? (Jul 14, 2022), available at: https://www.kff.org/policy-watch/could-consumer-assistance-
be-helpful-to-people-facing-medical-debt/. See also National Consumer Law Center, Collection Actions § 
9.5.6.3 (5th ed. 2020) (collecting previous research about medical billing errors). 
46 15 U.S.C. § 1681i. 

17 
Q13. What actions should agencies consider taking to better understand 
the effects of medical payment products on consumers and the health care 
industry, educate consumers and providers about the risks of these 
products, and collect complaints? 
Q13(i). What are some sources of data on medical payment products? What 
additional data are needed to understand the impact of medical payment products 
on patients and the health care industry? 
Sources of data include: 
● 
Terms and conditions for medical payment products; 
● 
Consumer complaints through the CFPB complaint portal and other sources (e.g., Better 
Business Bureau, Attorney General offices, etc.);  
● 
Focus groups with consumers and consumer advocates about experiences with particular 
medical payment products; 
● 
Contractual agreements and reports between medical payment product providers and 
medical providers; 
● 
Reports about entities that are subject to government supervision; 
● 
Information filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission or from shareholder 
meetings (for publicly traded companies);  
● 
Information filed in court cases or data about court practices (e.g., information about the 
number of lawsuits filed by medical payment product providers); and  
● 
Conversations with current and former employees. 
 
Q13(ii). What data collection, data analysis, and research actions should agencies 
take? 
Agencies should obtain and analyze the data listed above and then publish their reports.  
Given its supervision authority, the CFPB should be able to obtain significant information from credit 
card lenders that are banks with over $10 billion in assets, which includes Synchrony. This could 
include information that Synchrony has stated was confidential and withheld, including to members 
of Congress, such as its agreements with providers.47 Other federal and state agencies may also 
                                               
47  Companies’ Responses to Senators’ 2022 Questions, available at: 
https://www.warren.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Medical%20Credit%20Card%20Companies%20Response
s.pdf.  

18 
have access to information about the agreements between medical providers and medical payment 
product companies through their oversight, supervision, or licensing of different medical providers. 
 
Q13(iii). Are there different or other actions that agencies should consider for 
underserved communities, including Tribal communities and geographically isolated 
communities? 
It is particularly important to reach out to members of these communities through focus groups, 
analyze complaints from such communities, and speak to advocates working with these 
communities. 
 
Q14. Where medical payment products are causing harm, what are some 
specific levers for regulatory oversight and enforcement by Federal 
agencies that regulate financial products or health care providers? 
The following are the recommendations for action on medical credit cards by federal agencies from 
Health Care Plastic:48  
Recommendations for the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
● 
Prohibit deferred interest on all credit cards, including medical credit cards, 
using the CFPB’s authority under the Credit CARD Act. The CFPB has clear 
legal authority to ban deferred interest given its broad grant of rulemaking authority 
under the Act.  
● 
Prohibit medical credit cards from placing a charge on an account or issuing 
funds before a medical procedure is completed or the medical product is 
delivered (with limited exceptions). Require medical credit card companies to 
instruct consumers that they have the right to cancel financing arrangements with no 
penalty before beginning the procedure.  
● 
Remind credit card companies that patients are entitled to withhold payment 
based on claims or defenses due to problematic practices by medical 
providers related to medical credit cards, and that they must conduct a 
reasonable investigation of such disputes. Require companies to provide special 
outreach materials informing patients of this right. Require that companies cease 
working with medical providers that are engaging in abusive practices.  
● 
Adopt the requirements of the 2013 Consent Order against CareCredit as 
regulations, such as requiring patients to apply directly with the credit card company 
                                               
48 Health Care Plastic at 28 - 29. 

19 
for credit limits over $1,000; requiring training of provider staff; and prohibiting 
providers from charging for services not yet rendered, with limited exceptions.  
● 
Clarify that a credit card company violates the Credit CARD Act’s ability-to-pay 
requirements if it does not have procedures in place to ensure that providers are not 
providing inflated income amounts or improperly filling out applications for patients 
with incorrect information.  
● 
Where consumer complaints reference false, deceptive, misleading, or unfair 
practices by medical providers, forward those complaints to relevant state or 
federal agencies with enforcement authority. Require credit card companies to 
monitor providers for such practices and cease doing business with them if such 
practices are detected.  
● 
Collaborate with the FTC to bring enforcement actions against debt collectors 
that are collecting or filing suit on unsubstantiated claims arising from medical 
financial products.  
● 
Include research about and discussion of medical credit cards in the CFPB’s 
consumer credit card market reports.  
● 
Issue reports about medical financial products, outlining potential risks for 
consumers, including particular risks for older Americans and consumers with 
limited English proficiency.  
Recommendations for Department of Health and Human Services  
● 
Issue a joint statement with the CFPB condemning false, deceptive, 
misleading, and unfair practices by medical providers connecting patients to 
medical credit cards. This statement should also clarify that, when medical 
providers receive federal funding, they have a duty to provide meaningful language 
access, and that duty extends to communications with patients regarding medical 
credit cards.   
● 
Issue a statement by the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services 
informing providers that they should not offer medical credit cards when 
Medicaid will cover a service, and that they must inform patients regarding the 
option of a Medicaid covered service when offering or upselling an alternative 
procedure that is not covered by Medicaid. 
Additionally, we believe that some medical payment product companies that might otherwise meet 
the legal definition of a debt collector under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA) are 
attempting to exploit the exclusion from that definition where debt are acquired before they were in 
default49 by stating in contractual agreements with providers that accounts are not in default when 
they are acquired.50 This is presumably so that the medical payment provider can argue that it does 
                                               
49 15 U.S.C. 1692a(6)(F)(iii). 
50 See, e.g., AccessOne Medical Charge Account Agreement between AccessOne MedCard, Inc. and AU 
Health System, Inc. ¶ 1.2(g) (Oct. 7, 2019), available at: 

20 
not need to comply with the FDCPA. The CFPB should use its authority to issue FDCPA 
regulations51 to define the term “default.” 
HHS should also pursue opportunities to obtain additional information about medical financial 
products. For example, HHS should add questions about medical financial products to a previously 
announced effort to collect information about medical debt collection.52 HHS should also collaborate 
with other federal agencies to add questions about medical debt and medical financial products to 
existing surveys such as the Census Bureau’s Survey of Income and Program Participation and the 
Center for Disease Control’s National Health Interview Survey. 
Additionally, to the full extent of its authority pursuant to 42 C.F.R. § 482.1(a), HHS should require 
reporting about Medicare, Medicaid, and Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) co-insurance 
and cost sharing that is charged to medical financial products. HHS should restrict hospitals that 
accept Medicare funds from marketing medical payment products to Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP 
recipients. 
 
Q14(i). Are there specific areas for Federal enforcement actions? 
Health Care Plastic discusses numerous abusive practices that would be appropriate targets for 
federal enforcement actions. 
 
                                               
https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/23897552/accessone-au-health-contract.pdf (one of the criteria 
for an “Eligible Charge” is that “the Patient Receivable is not in default at the time it is paid with an 
AccessOne Charge Account”); AccessOne Medical Charge Account Agreement between AccessOne 
MedCard, Inc. and UNC Health Care System  ¶ 1.2(g) (June 12, 2019), available at: 
https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/23897548/accessone-unc-contract.pdf (same); Amended and 
Restated Receivables Purchase Agreement between AccessOne MedCard, Inc. and The Charlotte-
Mecklenburg Hospital Authority ¶ 1.2(i) (Jan. 1, 2014), available at: 
https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/23897549/accessone-atrium-health-contract.pdf (same). 
51 15 U.S.C. 1692l(d). 
52 See, e.g., White House, Fact Sheet: The Biden Administration Announces New Actions to Lessen the 
Burden of Medical Debt and Increase Consumer Protection (Apr. 11, 2022), available at: 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/04/11/fact-sheet-the-biden-
administration-announces-new-actions-to-lessen-the-burden-of-medical-debt-and-increase-consumer-
protection/ (“HHS will request data from more than 2,000 providers on medical bill collection practices, 
lawsuits against patients, financial assistance, financial product offerings, and 3rd party contracting or 
debt buying practices. The Department will, for the first time, weigh this information in their grantmaking 
decisions, publish topline data and policy recommendations for the public, and share potential violations 
with the relevant enforcement agencies of jurisdiction.”).  

21 
Q14(iii). What complementary legislative actions are worth exploring? Where may 
additional statutory authority be needed? 
Amendments to the IRS financial assistance regulations or the FTC Act’s prohibition against unfair 
or deceptive acts and practices can be used to address the problems posed by medical credit cards 
and payment products. However, the IRS regulations and the FTC Act cannot be enforced directly 
by consumers. For example, if a patient is convinced to place a medical debt on a medical credit 
card instead of receiving financial assistance or insurance coverage, they cannot file a lawsuit to 
enforce the IRS financial assistance regulations or Section 5 of the FTC Act. The single most 
effective legislative measure would be to give patients the ability to file a lawsuit to enforce the IRS 
financial assistance regulations or the FTC Act when they are harmed by problematic practices with 
respect to medical credit cards or other lending products.    
 
2. CFPB-Specific Questions 
Q1. What actions should the CFPB consider taking to address problematic 
practices related to medical credit cards or loans, including debt collection 
and credit reporting practices? 
Please see the answers from the previous section, especially the responses to questions 13 and 14.  
In addition, both NCLC and Community Catalyst have filed petitions for rulemaking urging the CFPB 
to ban the reporting of all medical debts from credit reports.53 We urge the CFPB to include specialty 
medical financing products in such bans, including medical credit cards and loans, and to require 
credit card lenders to identify what portion of credit card balances is medical debt when they furnish 
information to a nationwide CRA so that these amounts can also be excluded from credit reports. 
With respect to deferred interest, we remind the CFPB that we have repeatedly urged the CFPB to 
ban this inherently deceptive practice. NCLC made this recommendation in our comments to the 
Credit CARD Act study RFIs in 2013, 2015, 2017, 2019, 2020, and 2023,54 as well as our 2015 
report on the practice55 and other regulatory comments.56 Indeed, we began advocating for the 
                                               
53 Community Catalyst, Request for Rulemaking Pursuant to the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), 
available at: https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/petitions-rulemaking/community-catalyst-fcra-
petition/;  NCLC, et al., Petition for Rulemaking: Ban Medical Debts from Credit Reports (Sept. 30, 2022), 
available at: https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/petitions-rulemaking/nclc-et-al-petition/.  
54 NCLC 2023 Comments to CARD Act RFI at 2 (listing of NCLC comments to CARD Act study RFIs). 
55 Chi Chi Wu, National Consumer Law Center, Deceptive Bargain: The Hidden Time Bomb of Deferred 
Interest Credit Cards at 9 (Dec. 2015) www.nclc.org/resources/deceptive-bargain-the-hidden-time-bomb-
of-deferred-interest-credit-cards/. 
56 See, e.g., Comments of NCLC, et al to CFPB on ability-to-pay requirements and household income at 
5-6 (Jan. 7, 2012), available at: www.nclc.org/resources/group-comments-to-the-consumer-financial-
protection-bureau-regarding-regulation-z-12-c-f-r-part-1026/.  

22 
elimination of deferred interest right after the Credit CARD Act of 2009 was passed and have done 
so consistently for over a decade. All of the reasons that we advocate for a ban on deferred interest 
are as valid as ever, and as discussed in more detail in NCLC’s 2023 Comments to CARD Act RFI 
at pages 2 to 9, include: 
● 
Inherent deception. Deferred interest promotions are inherently deceptive. Many 
consumers simply do not understand how these promotions work, because they are 
complicated by nature 
● 
Harming the most vulnerable. Multiple CARD Act reports published by the CFPB have 
found that it is consumers with lower credit scores who bear the brunt of retroactively 
charged deferred interest. Thus, struggling consumers are subsidizing free credit for 
superprime consumers. 
● 
Impacting millions and a growing problem. Synchrony alone has 14 million accounts with 
deferred interest promotions. About 20 percent of these accounts end up being assessed 
retroactive deferred interest, or about 2.8 million accounts. The CFPB’ has found that total 
deferred interest purchase volume was over $60 billion in 2020, nearly double the volume 
from 2011. The aggregate amount of deferred interest assessed to consumers increased by 
45 percent from 2015 to 2020, to just over $2.5 billion in total.57  
● 
Difficulty determining monthly payments that will pay off the balance. Issuers generally 
set the minimum payment at less than the amount that would pay off the balance during the 
deferred interest period. Consumers do not understand this, or they have trouble calculating 
the amount necessary to pay each month to avoid being assessed deferred interest.  
● 
Payment allocation makes a bad problem even worse. Consumers with a deferred 
interest balance may have other balances that are not subject to a promotion or have a 
different promotional period. Payment allocation in these instances is very complicated, and 
it can be nearly impossible to pay off a deferred interest balance to avoid retroactive interest. 
 
Q2. How do firms offering medical financial products typically market to 
providers? 
In a letter from Wells Fargo to Senator Warren on January 23, 2023, Wells Fargo reported that: 
We may offer a few manufacturers or professional member groups funds to promote the 
WFHA product directly to providers . . . No paid endorsements are offered to hospitals or 
health associations.58  
                                               
57 NCLC 2023 Comments to Credit CARD Act RFI at 5-6. 
58 Companies’ Responses to Senators’ 2022 Questions, available at: 
https://www.warren.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Medical%20Credit%20Card%20Companies%20Response
s.pdf.  

23 
In an addendum to a letter from Synchrony to Senators Warren, Markey, Sanders, Murphy, and 
Brown on January 26, 2023, Synchrony reported that: 
CareCredit does not have any paid endorsement arrangements with any of its providers, 
including hospitals. 
CareCredit does, however, have over 150 relationships with professional and other 
associations (including the American Dental Association and the American Veterinary 
Medical Association), manufacturers, and buying groups, which endorse and promote our 
products to their professional members or practices . . . Contracts with these associations 
are confidential, but may contain sponsorship payments and/or royalty payments.59 
CareCredit also wrote that: 
CareCredit’s relationships with professional and other associations pertain to associations of 
commercial, not consumer, entities. The terms of these relationships vary, but generally 
provide for one or more of the following types of payments made by CareCredit to the 
association: 
● 
A sponsorship payment (often in conjunction with CareCredit being recognized as a 
sponsor at the association’s annual tradeshow or meeting); 
● 
An enrollment royalty where CareCredit pays the association an amount for each 
professional member (e.g. dentist, veterinarian, cosmetic surgeon) that the 
association refers to the CareCredit network; or 
● 
A sales royalty where CareCredit pays the association a percentage of the sales 
resulting from new professional member enrollments attributed to the association.60 
We are unaware of any other publicly-available information about marketing strategies for other 
medical financial products beyond the information that medical providers included on websites for 
specific medical financial products. However, we anticipate that medical payment product companies 
present at relevant medical industry conferences, either as speakers or as exhibitors. We anticipate 
that they provide webinars or continuing education sessions virtually about their products and that 
they place ads in relevant industry publications in addition to adopting some or all of the marketing 
strategies addressed by Wells Fargo and CareCredit. 
 
                                               
59 Id. 
60 Id. 

24 
Q3. How do creditors and their affiliates underwrite loans to patients? What 
specific factors (e.g., age, type of medical procedure, credit score, etc.) are 
considered in underwriting? 
Medical credit card providers check the applicant's credit report61 and obtain some information about 
the medical provider or procedure. For example, Wells Fargo inquires about the name of the medical 
provider or the type of care in the medical credit card application process - asking the consumer to 
choose between audiology, dental, veterinary, and vision.62 When consumers apply for CareCredit, 
the company asks the applicant to “Select your healthcare category,” listing: cosmetic surgery, 
cosmetic treatments, dental, eye exams/eye glasses, LASIK/vision surgery, hearing, health 
systems/hospitals, veterinary, weight loss, weight loss surgery, or other. Alphaeon Credit asks 
consumers to “Select Your Practice” or pre-qualify but does not immediately ask for information 
about the type of medical procedure on a webpage that can be accessed without providing personal 
information.63 
Here are two examples of practices used by other medical payment providers: 
● 
AccessOne states “[r]egardless of credit history, all patients qualify for our program and have 
access to the same non-discriminatory payment terms.”64 The sign-up process for this 
company requires consumers to select a participating provider and input the specific account 
number.65 The website warns that, “Your account must be in good standing with your 
healthcare provider to be eligible for AccessOne.”66  
● 
The company PayZen says that it “applies our financial and credit underwriting expertise and 
our sophisticated AI-enabled risk models to instantly analyze and underwrite each individual 
patient.”67 Elsewhere the website elaborates that PayZen uses “[u]nique data assets with 
                                               
61 See, e.g., Alphaeon Credit Card, More Details, available at: 
https://d.comenity.net/ac/alphaeoncosmetic/public/home (“Credit card offers are subject to credit 
approval.”); CareCredit, FAQs, available at: https://www.carecredit.com/faqs (“If you prequalify and then 
you apply, there will be a hard inquiry on your credit report.”); Wells Fargo, Wells Fargo Health Advantage 
Card, available at: https://retailservices.wellsfargo.com/locator/WFHA (“Subject to credit approval”). 
62 Wells Fargo, Getting started, available at: https://retailservices.wellsfargo.com/locator/get-started (see 
pull down menu above “Apply Now” button). See also Companies’ Responses to Senators’ 2022 
Questions, available at: 
https://www.warren.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Medical%20Credit%20Card%20Companies%20Response
s.pdf (“Applicants must demonstrate that they are creditworthy and satisfy federally mandated ‘ability to 
pay’ requirements in order to receive a CareCredit credit card.”). 
63 Alphaeon Credit, Secure Application, available at: https://go.alphaeoncredit.com/credit-portal/apply.  
64 AccessOne, Empowering Patients, available at: https://accessonepay.com/patients/.  
65 AccessOne, New Account Application, available at: https://myaccessone.com/applications/signup.  
66 Id. (emphasis in original). 
67 PayZen, PayZen personalized payment plans, available at: https://payzen.com/solutions/.  

25 
30,000 data points (including full credit attributes from soft pull).”68 The goal of this 
underwriting appears to be to set an amount to pay to the provider directly, as the company 
appears to act as a debt buyer and then collect the face value of the account from the 
consumer.69 Consumers are told that, “If the healthcare service you receive from your 
provider is eligible for PayZen payment plans, you can sign up anytime. There’s no credit 
application and your credit score won’t be affected.”70 We could not find any information 
about what services are eligible and elsewhere the website states that “100% of patients can 
enroll,”71 which appears to conflict with the statement that only certain healthcare services 
are eligible.  
We encourage the CFPB to continue to investigate these topics for other medical payment 
providers. 
 
Q4. Do consumers understand the risks of paying medical bills via a 
medical credit card, installment loan, or other commercial payment product, 
including lowered ability to negotiate their bill with their provider? 
No, many consumers do not understand the risk of paying medical bills with medical payment 
products. 
Health Care Plastic provides data about some areas where consumers are likely to lack 
understanding: 
● 
53% of survey respondents reported that the staff of the medical provider described the 
terms of credit incorrectly; 
● 
50% observed that clients never received disclosures about the credit card terms when 
signing up; 
● 
47% noted that clients were told that there was 0% interest when there was actually deferred 
interest; 
                                               
68 PayZen, A first-of-its-kind Affordability Financing platform, available at: https://payzen.com/for-
providers/.  
69 See PayZen, PayZen personalized payment plans, available at: https://payzen.com/solutions/ (“Once 
the payment source for each plan is verified, an adjustment file is automatically sent to the provider for 
the full weighted balance – so providers get paid up-front, with zero days in A/R, 100% non-recourse. The 
debt is off your books and the cash is in-hand.”).  
70 PayZen, PayZen is your provider’s healthcare affordability partner, available at: 
https://payzen.com/patients/for-patients/.  
71 PayZen, A first-of-its-kind Affordability Financing platform, available at: https://payzen.com/for-
providers/.  

26 
● 
44% had clients that did not understand the explanation of the deferred interest promotion; 
● 
38% of advocates reported that clients with limited English proficiency were only presented 
with information in English; and 
● 
26% of respondents had clients who were asked to sign up for medical credit cards when the 
client(s) had diminished capacity to consent.72 
As discussed in our response to question 14, we recommend banning deferred interest and the 
adoption of some of the provisions of the 2013 CareCredit consent order to address some of these 
problems. 
 
Q5. To what extent are alleged debts placed on medical credit cards and 
loans sent to debt collectors?  
In NCLC’s survey of consumer advocates about their clients’ experiences with medical credit cards, 
more than two-thirds of respondents (68%) reported that their clients had been sued on medical 
credit card debt and nearly a third of survey respondents (32%) mentioned frequent collection 
communications as a problem.73  
Issuers of medical credit cards such as Synchrony Financial and Wells Fargo are active litigants in 
state courts around the country - although available data does not distinguish between lawsuits on 
medical credit cards and other financial products.74 They may work with collection laws firms to file 
                                               
72 Health Care Plastic at 4. 
73 Id. at 17. 
74 See, e.g., Claire Johnson Raba, The Debt Collection Lab, One-Sided Litigation: Lessons from Civil 
Docket Data in California Debt Collection Lawsuits 19 (July 2023), available at: 
https://debtcollectionlab.org/research/one-sided-litigation (from 2009 to 2020, Wells Fargo filed 35,933 
debt collection lawsuits and Synchrony Bank filed 24,705 in 16 counties in California); National Consumer 
Law Center, Pandemic Lawsuits in California: Credit Card Issuers and Debt Buyers Top Litigants in 2021 
(July 2022), available at: https://www.nclc.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/08/IB_CA_2021_collection_lawsuits-1.pdf (Synchrony Bank filed 6,798 lawsuits in 
16 California counties in 2021); Daniel Wilf-Townsend, Assembly-Line Plaintiffs, 135 Harvard L. Rev. 
1704, 1732 (May 2022), available at: https://harvardlawreview.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/135-
Harv.-L.-Rev.-1704.pdf (Synchrony Bank was the seventh most common filer of collection lawsuits in 
2019 civil lawsuits in sample states with 26,510 total cases filed; also listing Wells Fargo although not 
providing data about total lawsuits); Reinvestment Fund, Debt Collection in Philadelphia 6 (Mar. 2021), 
available at: https://clsphila.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/ReinvestmentFund_2021_PHL-Debt-
Collection-Final-report.pdf (listing Synchrony Bank as one of the 10 largest filers in Philadelphia debt 
collection cases); Julia Barnard, et al., Suing-to-Intimidate: New Evidence Confirms that Oportun Abuses 
and Intimidates Families in Court to Collect Small-Dollar Loan Debts in California Courts at Appx. A 
(Center for Responsible Lending, Mar. 2021), available at: 
https://www.responsiblelending.org/sites/default/files/nodes/files/research-publication/crl-oportun-suing-
to-intimidate-mar2021.pdf (showing Wells Fargo among the top filers of debt collection lawsuits in Los 
Angeles County Superior Courts from 2018–2020). 

27 
these lawsuits. They may also sell some accounts to debt buyers who may in turn file collection 
lawsuits or place accounts with debt collectors for collection. 
AccessOne acts like a debt collector in its interactions with medical providers. AccessOne pays the 
amount due to the hospital over time as the consumer makes payments - minus a 6% “servicing 
fee.”75 (Alternatively, in some cases hospitals can receive up front payment for an additional 4%+ 
servicing fee. However, this arrangement is only available where the consumer achieves a certain 
threshold credit score.)76 AccessOne then returns accounts to the medical facility after the consumer 
misses three consecutive months of minimum monthly payments (referred to as a “chargeback” or 
“repurchase” of accounts).77 Depending on the hospital’s collection policy, those accounts may be 
sent to the state for collection, including garnishment of tax refunds,78 or subject to a lawsuit by the 
hospital that receives the returned accounts.79 
                                               
75 AccessOne Medical Charge Account Agreement between AccessOne MedCard, Inc. and AU Health 
System, Inc. ¶ 1.4 (Oct. 7, 2019), available at: 
https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/23897552/accessone-au-health-contract.pdf (“The AccessOne 
Receivable for each Patient Receivable paid with an AccessOne Charge Account is equal to 100% of 
such Patient Receivable, less servicing fee . . . of 6.0% for a new amount . . . equal to 94% . . . 
AccessOne makes no initial payment to the Providers on an AccessOne Receivable and instead pays the 
amount due to the Providers by paying to the Providers, on each Payment Date, an amount equal to 94% 
of the amount of each principal payment made by the Patient Accountholder”). 
76 Id. at Appx. E; AccessOne Medical Charge Account Agreement between AccessOne MedCard, Inc. 
and UNC Health Care System  Appx. E (June 12, 2019), available at: 
https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/23897548/accessone-unc-contract.pdf (partially redacted). 
77 AccessOne Medical Charge Account Agreement between AccessOne MedCard, Inc. and AU Health 
System, Inc. ¶ 1.6, Appx. C (Oct. 7, 2019), available at: 
https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/23897552/accessone-au-health-contract.pdf; AccessOne 
Medical Charge Account Agreement between AccessOne MedCard, Inc. and UNC Health Care System  ¶ 
1.6 (June 12, 2019), available at: https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/23897548/accessone-unc-
contract.pdf; Amended and Restated Receivables Purchase Agreement between AccessOne MedCard, 
Inc. and The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Hospital Authority ¶ 1.5(a) (Jan. 1, 2014), available at: 
https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/23897549/accessone-atrium-health-contract.pdf. 
78 Noam Levey and Aneri Pattani, “How banks and hospitals are cashing in when patients can't pay for 
health care” National Public Radio (Nov. 17, 2022), available at: https://www.npr.org/sections/health-
shots/2022/11/17/1136201685/medical-debt-high-interest-credit-cards-hospitals-profit (“UNC Health 
refers unpaid bills to the state revenue department, which can garnish patients’ tax refunds.”); Joseph 
Neff, “In collecting bills, UNC Health Care has powerful friends” News & Observer (Jan. 3, 2013), 
available at: https://journalnow.com/in-collecting-bills-unc-health-care-has-powerful-
friends/article_30fbc504-55ad-11e2-a8f4-0019bb30f31a.html (“Last year, UNC Hospitals collected $5.7 
million, while UNC Physicians and Associates collected $2 million. Together, that accounted for 11 
percent of the $72 million of set off debt collected for all state and local agencies that year . . . It’s not 
unusual for UNC Health Care to collect debt 10 or more years older.”).  
79 Id. citing Atrium Health Billing and Collection Policy, available at: https://cdn.atriumhealth.org/-
/media/chs/files/for-patients-visitors/financial-assistance/atrium-health-billing-and-collections-policy-
82022.pdf. See also Barak Richman, et al., Hospitals Suing Patients: How Hospitals Use N.C. Courts to 
Collect Medical Debt 12, 15 (2023), available at: 
https://scholarship.law.duke.edu/faculty_scholarship/4261 (reporting that Atrium filed 2,482 lawsuits from 

28 
 
Q6. How can the CFPB use its authorities to ensure people with medical 
bills in collections, including medical payment product debt, are screened 
for eligibility for financial assistance and other benefits? 
In March 2022, NCLC wrote to Director Chopra to outline steps that the CFPB should take to protect 
consumers with medical debt.80 Below we list recommendations from that letter that are most 
responsive to this question while reiterating the other requests from that letter: 
● 
Require debt collectors to include notice about any financial assistance policy in their 
communications with consumers.  
● 
Require debt collectors to provide notice about any financial assistance policies when 
consumers indicate that they are experiencing financial hardship - even if the consumer does 
not specifically ask about financial assistance. 
● 
Prohibit misrepresentations about financial assistance or the consumer’s eligibility for such 
assistance. 
● 
The CFPB should meet with the team at the Internal Revenue Service that is responsible for 
compliance with non-profit hospital financial assistance rules, pursuant to the Affordable 
Care Act and 26 CFR 1.501(r). The agencies should consider issuing joint guidance 
regarding the duty of nonprofit hospitals to provide financial assistance to low-income 
patients, and the hospitals’ responsibility to refrain from credit reporting or collection activity 
until after eligibility for financial assistance has been determined. Otherwise, those who 
collect or report those debts for the hospitals may be in violation of the FDCPA, since the 
correct amount of the debt has not been established.   
Q7. How are health care providers and financial companies using credit or 
“propensity to pay” scores to determine patients' eligibility for financial 
assistance or medical payment products? What are the implications for 
compliance with the Fair Credit Reporting Act or other CFPB authorities? 
Several companies sell “propensity to pay” scores to healthcare providers. One example is Paro, 
which “provides automated charity screening capabilities” for financial assistance.81 Paro was 
acquired in 2019 by Waystar, which sells a revenue cycle management platform (i.e., collections 
                                               
2017 to 2022 and was responsible for 42 percent of lawsuits filed by North Carolina hospital systems 
against patients during that period). 
80 Letter from Jen Bosco, et al, National Consumer Law Center, to Director Rohit Chopra, Consumer 
Financial Protection Bureau (Mar. 22, 2022), available at: https://www.nclc.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/09/CFPB_med_debt_action_ltr.pdf.  
81 Paro, Homepage, available at: https://www.paroscore.com/. 

29 
software) to healthcare providers.82 Despite the fact that Paro is marketed for eligibility 
determinations for a financial decision, Paro claims “PARO Charity Screening reports, products and 
services do not constitute a ‘consumer report’ as that term is defined in the federal Fair Credit 
Reporting Act.”83 Thus, Paro is likely not complying with the FCRA’s requirements for accuracy, 
dispute resolution, disclosure of consumers’ file information or adverse action notice requirements. 
Paro and its use by providers is thus likely not transparent to patients, which can harm them. If a 
patient is not provided financial assistance due to Paro’s information, they will not be informed of this 
fact with an adverse action notice, nor will they be able to see what information Paro has about them 
or to dispute any errors. 
Another company offering propensity to pay products is Experian Health. These products include: 
● 
Patient Financial Clearance, which Experian claims “determines which patients are likely to 
pay and connects those who potentially qualify for financial assistance with the right 
programs.”84 This includes Healthcare Payment Risk Score, which supposedly predicts a 
patient’s propensity to pay.85 Experian boasts users can “[l]everage Experian’s 
comprehensive data and analytics capabilities to calculate the patient’s optimal payment plan 
amount based on the patient’s unique financial situation.”86 
● 
Collections Optimization Manager, which Experian claims “helps hospitals and health 
systems assess a patient’s unique financial situation and tailor collections strategies to meet 
their needs”87 and “monitors patient accounts for changes in their ability to pay and provides 
collections staff with targeted, timely updates enhancing recovery time and improving staff 
productivity.”88 This product can also supposedly “reveal those patients who likely are eligible 
for charity services, those who might prefer to pay in full at a discount, or those who might 
benefit from structured installment payments.”89 
                                               
82 Press release, With the acquisition of PARO, Waystar adds presumptive charity scoring solution to its 
technology platform (June 6, 2019)  https://www.waystar.com/news/with-the-acquisition-of-paro-waystar-
adds-presumptive-charity-scoring-solution-to-its-technology-platform/.  
83 Paro, Homepage, available at: https://www.paroscore.com/.  
84 Experian Health, Patient Financial Clearance (2020), available at: 
https://www.experian.com/content/dam/marketing/na/healthcare/brochures/patient-financial-
clearance.pdf. 
85 Id. 
86 Id. 
87 Experian Health, Case study: Targeted collections efforts yield outstanding results, available at: 
https://www.experian.com/content/dam/marketing/na/healthcare/case-studies/case-study-sanford-
collections-optimization-manager.pdf. 
88 Experian Health, To stay afloat financially, get smarter collections data, available at: 
https://www.experian.com/content/dam/marketing/na/healthcare/case-studies/case-study-altru-health-
system.pdf. 
89 Id. 

30 
All of these products appear to consider a consumer’s financial information. This raises the question 
from where Experian is obtaining the financial data - Is this data from the main credit reporting files 
(i.e., File One)? It is unclear from Experian Health’s website whether these products are FCRA 
compliant. 
In addition, both Paro and the Experian Health products raise a concern as to whether they are 
being used by nonprofit hospitals to make determinations as to presumptive ineligibility or exclusion 
from financial assistance programs. While the IRS rules regarding financial assistance allow for 
presumptive eligibility based on third-party information, presumptive denials are not permitted.90 
 
Q8. When hospitals write off a patient's debt as uncollectible or “bad debt” 
and cease attempts to collect, do they notify patients that collection 
attempts will cease? Would patients benefit from such notifications, and 
would such notifications reduce hospital revenue? 
We do not have data about whether hospitals notify patients that collection attempts will cease. 
However, we believe that such notice would be beneficial to consumers who would otherwise lack 
information that the hospital is no longer pursuing the collection of this amount. Such notice should 
not be sent if the medical provider is simply transferring the debt to another party, like a debt buyer, 
that will continue collection. Notice should also inform consumers if prior collection efforts on the 
account that has been written off will not prevent them from accessing future medical care from that 
provider. 
Medical providers should also notify all consumers that are deemed eligible for financial assistance 
that they qualify for financial assistance and their account balance is zero or has been discounted. 
This notification should also happen when the medical provider deems someone eligible for financial 
assistance without the consumer formally or actively applying. 
 
3. HHS-Specific Questions 
                                               
90 79 Fed. Reg. 78,954, 78,992 (Dec. 31, 2014)(Supplementary Information for 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(r)-
6(c)(2): “The final regulations do not treat as reasonable efforts a presumptive determination that an 
individual is not FAP-eligible”). 

31 
Q1. What actions should HHS consider taking to address problematic 
practices related to medical credit cards or loans, particularly as they relate 
to patients eligible for or enrolled in Medicare, Medicaid, or the Children's 
Health Insurance Program, or patients enrolled in Affordable Care Act 
Marketplace plans? 
The following are the recommendations for HHS from Health Care Plastic:91  
● 
Issue a joint statement with the CFPB condemning false, deceptive, misleading, and 
unfair practices by medical providers connecting patients to medical credit cards. This 
statement should also clarify that, when medical providers receive federal funding, they have 
a duty to provide meaningful language access, and that duty extends to communications with 
patients regarding medical credit cards.   
● 
Issue a statement by the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services informing 
providers that they should not offer medical credit cards when Medicaid will cover a 
service, and that they must inform patients regarding the option of a Medicaid covered 
service when offering or upselling an alternative procedure that is not covered by Medicaid. 
Additionally, to the full extent of its authority pursuant to 42 C.F.R. § 482.1(a), HHS should require 
reporting about Medicare, Medicaid, and Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) co-insurance 
and cost sharing that is charged to medical financial products. HHS should restrict hospitals that 
accept Medicare funds from marketing medical payment products to Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP 
recipients. 
 
Q3. Are there particular health care provider types that are most associated 
with being offered or offering medical payment products, and are these 
providers receiving directed payments or other incentives through State 
Medicaid programs? 
A 2021 report about the medical patient financing industry stated that dental care represented 59% 
of medical expenses financed, followed by “other” at 24%, cosmetic and dermatology care at 10%, 
vision care at 5%, and audiology at 2%.92 Recently medical credit cards and loans have also been 
used to pay for out-of-pocket medical costs associated with medical care traditionally covered by 
insurance.93 For example, Synchrony has partnered with several large health care providers, 
                                               
91 Health Care Plastic at 28 - 29. 
92 IbisWorld, Medical Patient Financing 16 (Dec. 2021). 
93 See Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Medical Credit Cards and Financing Plans 2 (May 2023), 
available at: https://s3.amazonaws.com/files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_medical-credit-
cards-and-financing-plans_2023-05.pdf; Noam Levey and Aneri Pattani, “How Banks and Hospitals Are 
Cashing in When Patients Can’t Pay for Health Care,” National Public Radio (Nov. 17, 2022), available at: 
https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2022/11/17/1136201685/medical-debt-high-interest-credit-

32 
including AdventHealth, Kaiser Permanente, and the Cleveland Clinic, to offer its CareCredit 
product.94 
In Health Care Plastic, we asked survey respondents to indicate where their clients have been 
offered medical credit cards. Respondents could select more than one option. Almost all 
respondents (94%) identified dentists as a place where their clients are offered medical credit cards. 
More than a quarter selected cosmetic surgery (26%) and veterinarians (26%). Some respondents 
reported that clients were offered medical credit cards for hearing services (17%), vision services 
(17%), or primary care (14%). A couple of respondents indicated that clients were offered medical 
credit cards at a hospital (6%), physical therapy (6%), or for weight loss procedures (6%). One 
respondent each indicated that a client was offered a medical credit card in the emergency room 
(3%) or for fertility or reproductive health (3%). One respondent selected none of the above (3%). No 
respondents selected mental / behavioral health, pharmacy, urgent care, or other. 
Here is the chart from Health Care Plastic containing these results. 
 
 
                                               
cards-hospitals-profit; Katherine Davis, “Hospitals pitch plastic to patients facing costly treatments,” 
Crain’s Chicago Business (Sept. 1, 2022), available at: https://www.chicagobusiness.com/health-
care/hospitals-medical-credit-cards-patients-afford-treatment.  
94 Synchrony Financial (SYF) Q2 2020 Earnings Call Transcript (July 21, 2020), available at: 
https://www.fool.com/earnings/ call-transcripts/2020/07/21/synchrony-financial-syf-q2-2020-earningscall-
tran.aspx. See also Companies’ Responses to Senators’ 2022 Questions 16-22, available at: 
https://www.warren.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Medical%20Credit%20Card%20Companies%20Response
s.pdf (listing hospitals in the CareCredit network). 

33 
Q7. How might HHS improve patient understanding of options for covering 
the cost of medical treatments?  
Please see the answer to Question 11 in Section 1. 
 
Q8. What financial relationships exist between medical payment product 
companies and health care providers? 
Please see the answer to Question 8 in Section 1. Additionally, servicing fees provided by hospitals 
to AccessOne are discussed in response to Question 5 in Section 2. 
 
Q9. Do health care providers or financial institutions market or recommend 
medical credit cards or loans to Federal health care program beneficiaries 
(e.g., Medicare, Medicaid, Affordable Care Act Marketplace, or Children's 
Health Insurance Program enrollees)? 
In Health Care Plastic, 21% of survey respondents reported that their clients were offered medical 
credit cards even though they have Medicaid and more than two-fifths of respondents (44%) 
reported that clients’ accounts were not submitted to insurance before being signed up for a medical 
credit card.   
The following is an excerpt from Health Care Plastic:95 
A legal services provider from California explained: “Unscrupulous providers often sign 
people up for private financing even when they should be covered by insurance.” The 
respondent further noted: “By getting paid directly from the finance company, providers avoid 
insurer scrutiny of costs and billing practices.” Another legal services attorney from California 
noted that services that “should have been paid by Denti-Cal” was a reason that consumers 
dispute credit charges. 
One legal services attorney from Massachusetts described clients signing up for medical 
credit cards after incorrectly being told that services were not covered by Medicaid: “[W]e've 
certainly seen people who sign up for Care Credit after their provider tells them their 
insurance, including Medicaid, wouldn't cover the services they need. Unfortunately, this 
information isn't always true and Medicaid members have paid for services on medical credit 
cards that Medicaid would have paid had the provider submitted a prior authorization request 
and/or claim.” Two legal services attorneys from California described clients being provided 
with medical credit cards after being “upsold” or “steered” into procedures not covered by 
Medicaid:  
                                               
95 Health Care Plastic at 17-18. 

34 
● 
“Many are Medi-Cal recipients who were upsold services by their Medi-Cal accepting 
dentists, who told them that they need implants (not covered by Denti-Cal) or 
porcelain crowns (not covered by Denti-Cal).”  
● 
“These products should not be facilitated through providers. These products 
perversely incentivize providers to burden patients with unaffordable debts and to 
steer them away from procedures covered by their insurance. Providers receive 
payment immediately through the finance company, without carrying any risk of 
borrower default.”  
 
Q10. Do medical payment product companies recommend certain health 
care providers to their users? Do companies limit where or how patients 
use medical credit cards? 
See Section 2, Question 3 for more information about how some medical payment providers require 
consumers to select a participating provider. 
The CFPB’s recent report about medical payment products addresses limits on how patients use 
medical credit cards in Appendix A in the Services Covered section.96 
 
4. Treasury-Specific Questions 
Q1. What policy actions should Treasury consider taking to address 
problematic practices related to medical credit cards or loans, including 
debt collection and credit reporting practices, to conform with the existing 
tax laws and regulations pertaining to tax-exempt hospitals? 
Treasury should amend its regulations governing non-profit financial assistance programs to provide 
better guidance to hospitals about their financial assistance and debt collection obligations and to 
help ensure that patients get financial assistance when eligible rather than getting signed up for a 
medical payment product. Treasury should clarify that offering a medical payment product before 
making a determination about eligibility for financial assistance does not constitute a reasonable 
effort to determine whether a person qualifies for the hospital’s financial assistance policy and thus 
violates Treasury’s regulations. 
 
                                               
96 Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Medical Credit Cards and Financing Plans 2 (May 2023), 
available at: https://s3.amazonaws.com/files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_medical-credit-
cards-and-financing-plans_2023-05.pdf 

35 
Q2. Should a tax-exempt hospital's signing patients up for medical payment 
products be considered similar to a tax-exempt hospital's selling medical 
debt, such that the special rules that only exclude debt sales from being 
extraordinary collection actions if certain requirements are met would be 
applied to these payment products? 
Our concern about this approach is that the hospitals would need to be parties to contracts with the 
medical payment providers in order to adopt these requirements as a condition of working at the 
hospital. To the extent that consumers need to access medical financial products, it would be better 
for the hospital not to have exclusive relationships with certain medical financial products, which may 
involve kickbacks to the medical provider and increase the cost of credit to the consumer. 
 
Q3. How would applying the debt sale special rules to payment products 
change hospitals' and payment product providers' current practices, 
especially those related to financial assistance eligibility screening, 
extraordinary collection actions, interest rates, and recall or return of 
balances owed by FAP-eligible individuals? 
We anticipate that medical payment providers would avoid entering into contractual agreements with 
non-profit medical providers subject to 501(r) to avoid these restrictions, especially the restriction on 
interest rate. Instead, they would likely market their medical financial products directly to consumers 
so that any consumers they sign up would not be subject to these requirements. This could be a 
positive result in that, as discussed in Health Care Plastic and as shown by the 2013 CFPB 
enforcement action against CareCredit, problems often result when the health care provider staff is 
handling the credit card application and disclosures. 
 
Q5. What are best practices for hospitals publishing and making patients 
aware of financial assistance programs (beyond compliance with the widely 
publicized requirements found in the section 501(r) regulations)? 
 
Some states have laws that impose affirmative obligations on hospitals to screen for financial 
assistance97 and require debt collectors to provide notice of financial assistance in each 
                                               
97 See, e.g., Colo. Rev. Stat. § 25.5-3-502(1) (“a health-care facility shall screen, unless a patient 
declines, each uninsured patient for eligibility for: . . . (b) Discounted care through the Colorado indigent 
care program”); Wash. Rev. Code § 70.170.060(5) (“For the purpose of providing charity care, each 
hospital shall develop, implement, and maintain a policy which shall enable indigent persons access to 
charity care. The policy shall include procedures for identifying patients who may be eligible for health 

36 
communication.98 These laws provide additional methods for consumers to connect with information 
about hospital financial assistance policies. 
Additionally, we note that some hospitals provide online tools to help consumers determine if they 
qualify for financial assistance.99 Such tools, when easily accessible on hospitals websites, can 
provide additional information about financial assistance eligibility to patients. 
 
Q8. Does the availability of medical payment products generally benefit the 
community or assist patients financially? 
Medical payment products create a large number of risks for consumers as outlined in our 
response to Section 1 Question 1. Additional consumer protections should be adopted to better 
protect consumers from these harms. 
 
* * * 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments. If you have questions about these 
comments, please contact April Kuehnhoff at akuehnhoff@nclc.org. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
National Consumers Law Center (on behalf of its low-income clients), 
Americans for Financial Reform Education Fund, and  
Georgia Watch 
                                               
care coverage through medical assistance programs . . . and actively assisting patients to apply for any 
available coverage.”). 
98 See, e.g., Conn. Gen. Stat. § 19a-509b(d) (“Each hospital which holds or administers one or more 
hospital bed funds shall require its collection agents to include a summary as provided in subsection (c) of 
this section in all bills and collection notices sent by such collection agents.”).  
99 See, e.g., Augusta Health, Financial Assistance, available at: https://augustahealth.myfa.app/.  
