9/5/2023 
 
 
VIA WWW.REGULATIONS.GOV 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
1700 G Street NW 
Washington, DC 20552 
 
RE: 
Docket No. CFPB–2023–0038; Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products 
 
 
On behalf of the American Veterinary Medical Association, which represents more than 
100,000 member veterinarians in every US state and territory, I am very pleased to submit these 
comments, in response to Docket No. CFPB-2023-0038, Request for Information Regarding 
Medical Payment Products, related to credit financing options for owners of pets and other 
animals. 
Owning a pet is a wonderful aspect of the lives of many Americans. Indeed, 56.8% of 
U.S. households own a pet.1 It is important to note that when an animal requires veterinary 
care, the full cost of care is typically due at the time of service. This means that when an owner 
is confronted with a medical emergency or other situation requiring immediate surgery or other 
interventions for their animal, they are often faced with unexpected and unbudgeted 
expenditures. Many pet owners harbor concerns that they cannot pay an unexpected bill for 
veterinary medical care. Even an unplanned expenditure of approximately $1,000 would cause 
financial stress to a little over half of respondents in one major survey.2  
Pet health insurance can play a role in helping to defray the cost of veterinary medical 
care, and while the uptake of pet health insurance by animal owners is increasing, the minority 
of pets are insured. Insurance penetration varies by location and species, but industry estimates 
range from a high of 18.6% of pets in California, to 0.1% of pets in South Dakota3. Even for those 
who do have a pet health insurance policy, in some cases, the owner still must provide payment 
up front and then work with the insurance agency for reimbursement.  
Medical payment products, such as healthcare credit cards, help many animal owners 
receive veterinary medical care for their animals that they would not otherwise be able to 
obtain.  If medical payment products or other options are not available, then animal owners – 
depending upon the nature and severity of their animal’s problem – can be faced with the very 
difficult choice of foregoing needed treatment, or euthanizing a beloved family pet because 
they do not have the immediate financial means to provide the care (what is often referred to in 
veterinary medicine as “economic euthanasia”).  This is not an uncommon circumstance in 
veterinary medicine and can have a significant impact upon the animal owner. However, with a 
healthcare credit card financing option, the owner may be able to spread payments out over six 
months without interest (unlike non-medical credit cards), enabling treatment to proceed, 
 
1 AVMA 2017 Pet Ownership and Demographic Sourcebook 
2 Williams et.al, 2020 ‘The Impact of Pet Health Insurance on Dog Owners’ Spending for Veterinary Services’ Animals, 10.1162. 
3 NAPHIA 2023 State of the Industry Report 

2 
 
saving the pet’s life or preserving an animal’s quality of life.  Providing animal owners with the 
option to access medical payment products, which allow them additional time and financial 
flexibility that may be needed to manage the cost of care, serves the animal-owning public well. 
Health and wellness credit cards can therefore be a good option for some consumers in 
certain situations, enabling owners to be responsive to their pet’s or other animal’s needs 
without experiencing financial stress, and to work with their veterinarian to provide medically 
necessary veterinary care that may not otherwise be undertaken. This can also help veterinary 
healthcare teams, who are deeply impacted when animals under their care must be euthanized 
due to economic factors.   
We believe that providing a range of financing options for veterinary services is in the 
best interest of animals, their owners, and the veterinary teams that work to provide their 
patients and clients with optimal care and support. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our comments, and please do not hesitate to 
contact us if you have any questions or would like more information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Janet D. Donlin, DVM, CAE 
Chief Executive Officer 
American Veterinary Medical Association 
 
