 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 1
 
 
September 11, 2023 
 
Via Electronic Submission Only: www.regulations.gov 
 
Czarina Biton, Team Lead, Marketplace 
Eligibility and Enrollment Group, Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services 
Octavian Carare, Supervisory Economist 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
Thomas West, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
U.S. Department of the Treasury 
 
Re: Request for Information Regarding Medical Payment Products, Docket No. CFPB-2023-0038; 
Docket No. CMS–2023–0106, Docket No. TREAS–DO–2023–0008 
Dear Mr. Carare, Ms. Biton, and Mr. West:  
On behalf of RIP Medical Debt, I am pleased to submit the following comments regarding the Request 
for Information (RFI) Regarding Medical Payment Products, Docket No. CFPB-2023-0038; Docket No. 
CMS–2023–0106, Docket No. TREAS–DO–2023–0008. RIP Medical Debt is a national nonprofit 
organization committed to lifting the burden of medical debt for millions of people nationwide. Our 
unique model combines the generosity of donors with debt industry expertise to abolish medical debt, 
mitigating significant financial and mental distress for millions of people. Through our work, we also 
seek to bring attention to the negative impacts caused by medical debt, distill its causes through applied 
research, and ultimately use these findings to change public policies and drive practice improvements. 
We appreciate your collective approach to the issues presented by medical payment products and 
welcome the opportunity to offer our insights and recommendations. We believe the growth of these 
products is one symptom of a broken health care system that leaves far too many people exposed to 
medical bills they cannot afford to pay. In our current flawed health care marketplace, medical 
payment products may seem like the only recourse for people who are desperate to receive care. Yet 
the guardrails currently in place within the financial services and health care sectors are insufficient to 
protect patients from being directed towards high-interest credit cards and loans when more 
affordable options might exist.  Our comments aim to strike the appropriate balance between 
preserving health care access for patients trapped in an imperfect market and curbing the types of 
questionable and potentially usurious financial practices that have sparked this RFI. We urge the 
Department of the Treasury, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and the Consumer 
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) to:  
1. Strengthen existing health care safety net and financial protections for low- and moderate-
income people;  

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 2
 
2. Increase monitoring and public reporting about trends in medical debt and health insurance 
denials;  
3. Work with members of Congress to expand affordable, comprehensive coverage and other 
consumer protections, such as financial assistance and fair billing practices; and  
4. Invest in programs and technologies that help health care providers, community organizations, 
and financial services institutions inform and screen patients for financial assistance and 
coverage programs that will help them avoid debt.  
.  
I. Selected General Questions 
A. Market-level inquiries 
What are the benefits, costs, and risks of medical payment products for consumers, health care 
providers, and companies offering these products? 
Our sense is that patients turn to riskier payment options such as credit cards when they perceive or 
believe that this is the best, or only, option they have for receiving health care services they need. First, 
patients may feel compelled to pay with credit to avoid being refused care for unpaid bills. Recent 
reporting of hospitals denying patients care when they have unpaid medical bills highlights how patients 
are vulnerable to a range of financing options in order to maintain health care access.1 While it is not yet 
clear how widespread this particular practice is, having medical debt is itself a common phenomenon. A  
shows that nearly a quarter of middle-class families (22.5%) have medical debt despite having insurance 
coverage, along with 12.3% of higher-income families and 20.8% of lower-income families.2 People with 
medical debt who still require health care may feel pressured to use credit to maintain continuity of 
care.  
Second, health insurance has increasingly shifted costs to patients through benefit and payment 
designs that either do not include certain essential health benefits or that use high deductibles, 
coinsurance rates, and copays. According to research from Crowe Revenue Cycle Analytics, “the 
deductible amount and/or the residual amount due from the patient after insurance 
payment...represented nearly 60% of patient bad debt in 2021, a five-fold increase in just three years." 
Deductibles for people with employer-sponsored health coverage have skyrocketed, more than doubling 
since 2010.  As the number of insurance products structured to include large out-of-pocket costs grows, 
it is more common for patients to be driven to strategies that rely on credit to cover their portion of the 
bill.  
 
1 See, e.g., Kliff, S. and Silver-Greenberg, J. “Nonprofit Health System Pauses Policy of Cutting Off Care for Patients 
in Debt,” New York Times (June 9, 2023). Accessed September 11, 2023 at 
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/09/health/allina-health-nonprofit-medical-debt.html.  
2 See Murdock, K.; Kendall, J.; and Kendall, D. “Medical Debt Hits the Heart of the Middle Class.” Third Way (August 
21, 2023). Accessed September 11, 2023 at https://www.thirdway.org/report/medical-debt-hits-the-heart-of-the-
middle-class.  

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 3
 
Similarly, patients may be susceptible to using credit or other risky payment products when their 
insurance plans carve out essential health services. This is particularly clear when looking at dental and 
audiology debt. These services are over-represented in the medical credit card market, likely due to the 
poor coverage offered by insurers in both public and employer-sponsored plans. For example, a recent 
survey by Kaiser Family Foundation found that about 7 in 10 Medicare beneficiaries report cost being a 
barrier to accessing hearing and dental services, often because the scope of their insurance benefit is so 
limited.3 At the same time, KFF reports close to half of Medicare beneficiaries have hearing difficulties 
and nearly one-third have a visual impairment, meaning there is a high need for these services with little 
insurance coverage—making it a prime target for credit card financing. 
How do patients faced with these scenarios react? It is true that some providers offer financial 
assistance, and that others may offer interest-free or low-interest payment plans to certain patients. But 
if patients are not aware of or able to access these less risky alternatives, credit may seem to be the 
only feasible option other than forgoing or delaying care. Patients who have access to credit may use 
their regular credit card to pay their out-of-pocket costs. If they can afford to pay down their credit card 
monthly, using credit to pay a copay or deductible is simply a matter of convenience. By contrast, 
patients without credit or with lower credit scores may be more likely to use a specialty medical credit 
card, installment loan, or crowdsourcing platform to finance their care.  
Relying on credit to pay for health care exposes patients to certain risks. First, depending on the type 
of product offered, specialty medical payment products may make credit more accessible to people who 
otherwise would not qualify for a traditional card. But as CFPB has noted, these products may also place 
them at greater risk of default or expose them to higher interest rates and fees than traditional lines of 
credit. Second, patients who use credit to pay for medical bills have effectively “converted” their 
medical debt to credit card debt. What was once a zero-interest balance due to their medical provider 
may now be subject to high interest rates from their credit card company and subject to reporting to 
credit reporting bureaus. While the national credit reporting agencies have made changes to how 
medical debt is reported, patients who have used credit cards to pay their medical bills do not benefit 
from this protection. Third, patients who rely on credit cards to pay for health care services may be less 
likely to resolve inaccuracies in medical bills. Medical billing is highly complex and susceptible to error. 
Providers are working to resolve high rates of insurer denials and address coding errors that are 
inherent to the billing system all within a contracted time frame. Once a bill is moved onto a credit card 
and the provider is paid, it is more challenging for a patient to contest or request a correction.  
 
 
 
3 Freed, M., et al. “Dental, Hearing, and Vision Costs and Coverage among Medicare Beneficiaries in Traditional 
Medicare and Medicare Advantage.” Kaiser Family Foundation (September 21, 2021). Accessed September 11, 
2023 at https://www.kff.org/health-costs/issue-brief/dental-hearing-and-vision-costs-and-coverage-among-
medicare-beneficiaries-in-traditional-medicare-and-medicare-advantage/.  

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 4
 
Patients can pay for care in many different ways, such as by medical credit card or loan, general 
purpose credit card, insurance, or through a zero-interest payment plan. What are the costs and 
benefits for health care providers of offering each of these methods? Are there situations where one 
method of payment is more advantageous than another? 
Zero-interest payment plans can be a practical option for patients who might otherwise not be able to 
afford to pay their portion at the time of service. Having sliding scale, interest-free or low-interest 
payment plans available could provide an important lifeline to tide patients over during a health crisis.  
Some providers do offer zero- or low-interest payment plans (see one example here). However, interest-
free options for providers often max out within six months from the time that the initial statement is 
sent. If the patient cannot afford the payment plan within this timeframe, providers may refer them 
instead to a bank loan offering or credit.  
Specialty medical credit cards and installment loans offer providers the benefit of a quick payment in a 
system where an interest-free payment plan from a self-pay patient may take weeks, months, or longer 
to collect. Leveraging credit card options to maximize patient payment is one strategy providers can 
deploy to speed up receipt of the patient’s portion of the bill. Credit cards do not require providers to be 
in the business of managing payment plans and servicing or supervising loans. As providers spend more 
time and resources on collection efforts, they are vulnerable to pitches from credit card companies that 
make it easier to resolve unpaid bills. 
How do medical payment products and health insurance coverage interact? Do group health plan or 
health insurance issuer practices contribute to uptake of medical payment products by patients and 
providers?  
As we stated above, we believe there are issues with benefit and plan design that contribute to the 
proliferation of medical payment tools in the health care marketplace. The increasing trend of people 
enrolled in high-deductible health plans, reported high rates of insurance denials, and an uneven 
landscape for financial assistance have created a complex maze patients are forced to navigate.  Recent 
data highlights how this collision translates into medical debt burden for the middle class and the 
uninsured. We must also draw attention to how high rates of insurance denials combined with low rates 
of patient appeals have left people exposed to debts they may not even be responsible for—debts that 
many people turn to financing options to cover to continue accessing care.  Insurer practices may 
elongate the billing process and increase pressure on patients to fulfill their perceived financial 
responsibility for unpaid medical bills.   
What are some best practices for health care providers who offer medical payment products in 
avoiding adverse financial and health impacts for patients?  
There are a number of best practices that health care providers can use to protect their patients from 
harm. Some of these practices include:  

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 5
 
• 
Committing to never charging interest or to use products that charge no interest for 
outstanding medical debt. When a provider commits to not charging interest, the need for 
deferred interest products is eliminated.  
• 
Ensuring that financial assistance and affordable payment plans are mentioned first and in 
every subsequent request for payment. Providers should take every opportunity to remind 
patients of their options for assistance, verbally and in billing statements.   
• 
Using presumptive eligibility tools to screen patients for eligibility for financial assistance and 
low-risk payment plans based on the patient’s ability—rather than propensity—to pay. Most 
outside companies that offer financing to patients can and do determine a patient’s income, and 
therefore could also identify eligibility for financial assistance and some means-tested programs. 
Providers should only work with outside vendors that integrate eligibility screens for financial 
assistance with any payment tool they are offering.  
• 
Offering regular in-service and onboarding training to admissions and revenue cycle staff on 
financial assistance policies and protocols. Health care admissions and revenue cycle jobs are 
high-turnover, high-volume positions that place a lot of demand on the employee. Providers 
should make sure employees understand and are able to clearly explain the assistance available 
to patients, as well as the terms and conditions for any payment products offered.   
• 
Establish guidelines for how medical payment products are marketed to patients. This could 
include offering clear definitions of unfamiliar financial terms (such as deferred interest), 
requiring a patient first be presented with an opportunity to apply for financial assistance, and 
creating rules around when such products can be offered (e.g., never presenting a patient with a 
medical credit card application during an appointment).  
What data collection, data analysis, and research actions should agencies take?  
Currently there is no public reporting of medical debt data.4 It is only when bills in collections are 
furnished to private credit reporting agencies and reported by those agencies that we have a snapshot—
albeit an incomplete one—of how medical debt is acquired, where, and by whom. There is a pressing 
need to find alternative ways to gather data about medical debt, even when it is not included on credit 
reports. In the private sector, researchers and several business entities attempt to capture the 
prevalence of medical debt through surveys. However, these vary widely in the types of questions 
asked; the race, ethnicity, language and disability (REL-D) data collected; and whether they reflect a 
point in time or are longitudinal. We recommend that the tri-agencies:  
Investigate how all-payer claims databases (and a federal pathway) could monitor medical debt 
through billing and payment data. Not knowing the prevalence of outstanding bills is a blind spot in 
monitoring medical debt. A national system that monitors billing and payment would help advance the 
work to address the inequities of medical debt. This includes debt in collections that are reported to 
 
4 The Census Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) asks a question about medical debt (re-added in 
2018) that provides a snapshot of medical debt but is one of the few federal efforts to monitor medical debt 
trends.  

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 6
 
bureaus but also debt in collections that is not reported, and late bills owed to the provider. Providers 
regularly work with third-party debt collection agencies on contract, rolling out debt files to those 
entities to collect on their behalf. That data could be shared with a repository to track unpaid medical 
bills and could assist in monitoring trends in patient’s out-of-pocket payments, as well as utilization of 
charity care. Measuring these elements would be hugely beneficial to the public, government 
stakeholders, and providers, creating a new level of transparency around medical billing and medical 
debt.  
Launch an advisory committee to develop a medical debt module to be added to the National Health 
Interview Survey (NHIS) and/or the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality’s Medical 
Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). The module can build off existing questions and provide deeper 
understanding of the prevalence and disproportionate harm of medical debt.  Such a module could 
assist in capturing the growth trends and effects of medical debt on people including health equity; 
additionally, the module could include a range of questions about how people finance their health care, 
including the use of financial products. Any report should be disaggregated by race, ethnicity, language, 
disability, chronic illness, sex, gender, age, household, income and identity. 
Ensure there are annual questions across various surveys (Federal Reserve, Labor, CDC, CMS, etc.) that 
address medical debt, payment method, insurance type/status and the intersection of social 
determinants of health and REL-D data. Including questions in annual surveys and reporting to the 
public are important surveillance tools in assessing the prevalence of medical debt, including regional 
variations. Per the Biden-Harris administration’s April 2022 announcement on actions to protect 
consumers and lessen the burden of medical debt on American families, HHS is tasked with evaluating 
how medical billing affects patient access to affordable health and the accrual of medical debt. In 
addition to adding medical debt questions to the MEPS and SIPP surveys, HHS could add a state module 
to the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). The BRFSS is a helpful way to further explore 
the cyclical effects of medical debt on mental health and well-being.  
Where medical payment products are causing harm, what are some specific levers for regulatory 
oversight and enforcement by Federal agencies that regulate financial products or health care 
providers? What complementary legislative actions are worth exploring? Where may additional 
statutory authority be needed? 
First, more needs to be done legislatively to address the high out-of-pocket costs that leave people 
unable to pay their medical bills. Congress must act to better align the affordability standard with 
livable wages. Potential legislative solutions include prohibiting insurance premiums from being more 
than a certain percentage of an individual or family’s income. 
Second, Congress should create more financial incentives for dental provider participation in 
Medicaid. Congress has explored making dental services a permanent benefit for both Medicaid and 
Medicare. These changes are long overdue given the mounting evidence that dental care access can 
reduce chronic illness, improve life expectancy, and increase employment opportunities.  

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 7
 
Third, Congress should expand consumer protections that promote fair, transparent billing and 
collection practices—including financial assistance. As the CFPB has noted, the primary users of 
deferred interest medical credit cards are currently located outside of hospital settings. Yet, the only 
federal requirements that exist around financial assistance and billing apply to tax-exempt hospitals 
under Section 501(r) of the Internal Revenue Code.5 The continued proliferation of for-profit hospitals 
means large swaths of the country are served by hospitals that have no meaningful requirements 
around financial assistance.6 Additionally, many hospital financial assistance policies do not apply to 
separately owned physician or tertiary services (e.g. diagnostics, anesthesia, orthotics/prosthetics) that 
patients expect to access at a hospital. Congress should explore pathways to expand financial assistance 
and fair billing requirements to for-profit hospital facilities and to provider groups that offer services in 
hospital or hospital-like settings, like ambulatory urgent care facilities. Congress should also explore the 
need for additional enforcement strategies for noncompliance of Section 501(r). 
Fourth, Congress should increase investments that support technology improvements for presumptive 
eligibility for financial assistance systems and consider matching funds for states that invest in 
systems that increase presumptive eligibility pathways for charity care. While a person can easily apply 
for a medical credit card (often being approved within the same day), it is much, much harder for the 
average patient to apply for financial assistance or Medicaid. Federal funding to support appropriate use 
of presumptive eligibility screening tools could assist rural and smaller hospitals, in particular, to screen 
patients for financial help. These entities often do not have the funds to invest in available software and 
rely largely on paper applications—and patients taking the time to complete them.  
We have listed recommendations for Treasury, HHS and the CFPB in their sections below.  
B. Individual Inquiries  
We applaud the tri-agencies for asking for comment directly from patients who have used medical 
payment products. In response to the RFI, RIP conducted a brief survey of previous beneficiaries to get a 
better understanding of how individuals currently interact with medical credit cards and other specialty 
payment products. The survey was sent to a list of 1,087 individuals who have had medical debt 
abolished by RIP, and we received 90 total responses. Thirty-one percent of respondents (n= 29) to our 
 
5 See 26 U.S.C. § 501(r) and 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(r).  
6 As of 2021, just under 24% of hospitals in the United States were for-profit. However, the saturation of for-profit 
hospital care varies greatly across the country. To get a sense of the contrast, New York and Vermont have no for-
profit hospitals, while over 50% of hospitals in Nevada and Texas are for-profit. Seventeen states and the District of 
Columbia exceed the national average. Unless a state has extended requirements for financial assistance to for-
profit hospitals, patients in these states are not guaranteed access to hospital financial assistance. See “Hospitals 
by Ownership Type (2021).” Kaiser Family Foundation. Accessed September 11, 2023 at 
https://www.kff.org/other/state-indicator/hospitals-by-
ownership/?dataView=1&activeTab=map&currentTimeframe=0&selectedDistributions=for-
profit&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7D. See also Kona, M. and 
Raimugia, V. ”State Protections Against Medical Debt: A Look Policies Across US.” Commonwealth Fund 
(September 7, 2023). Accessed September 11, 2023 at https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/fund-
reports/2023/sep/state-protections-medical-debt-policies-across-us.   

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 8
 
survey reported being familiar with specialty medical payment products, which is in line with our sense 
that these products are an emerging—rather than widespread—issue. Survey respondents heard about 
these products through the following categories:  
• 
Just under 50% (n= 11) learned about medical credit cards through either the hospital billing 
department or from their provider/their staff directly; 
• 
40% (n= 9) were presented information on medical payment products through the dentist’s 
office;  
• 
35% (n= 8) reported learning about these products from other sources, varying from friends, the 
internet, and advertisement via mail.  
Of particular concern to us was the fact most respondents were not informed of other payment options 
(82%, n= 19) before being presented with medical credit cards. Indeed, only three people reported 
being told about other methods of payment. While the actual uptake of these products was low (only 7 
respondents report having used a medical credit card), attitude towards specialty medical payment 
products was split. It should be noted the same percentage (35%) felt very strongly that they were 
pressured into using these cards without fully understanding the consequences and in lieu of using 
traditional routes (i.e., filing with insurance, applying for financial assistance), so it may be that people 
who have used the cards have a more negative attitude than those who have not.  
Most respondents familiar with the products did not feel they were presented as a good alternative to 
health insurance (65%, n= 15). However, a substantial portion of respondents did feel these products 
were presented as a viable alternative instead of billing insurance. Additionally, most respondents felt 
these products were not clearly explained and had limited understanding of how they work, including 
the interest rate, the meaning of the term “deferred interest” (perhaps the largest area of concern), and 
the length of time they had to make payments. We feel this is an important area for more exploration: 
are the people who do use these cards more aggressively targeted than others? Are these cards more 
likely to be used when the way they work is misrepresented? What type of patient education should 
be required before signing up for these products? There is a clear need for more guardrails, 
particularly in the form of patient financial education and health care literacy.  
RIP asked beneficiaries who have used specialty medical payment products to share more about their 
experience and how the products were explained to them. While our survey response was small, people 
expressed a mix of relief at feeling like they had another option to pay for needed care and distress at 
the fact these cards are “the best of a lot of bad options.” To quote one beneficiary:  
Information on ways to help me pay for additional or adjusted costs was not readily 
forthcoming. Once it was decided I didn’t have the means to pay, CareCredit was suggested, or 
maybe some type of payment plan with additional immediate partial payment. I was unprepared 
for the extra, felt anxious, frustrated, angry, and fearful they would not proceed.  
Other respondents shared that they are now in debt to CareCredit and are unable to continue getting 
important follow-up care until that debt is cleared. Additionally, it appears most of the people who 

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 9
 
used these products were also insured and simply unable to bridge the gap between what their 
insurance covered and their out-of-pocket costs. As one respondent put it, “insurance is definitely not 
enough.” While the overall numbers were small, we were concerned to find that the majority of people 
who were presented and used these cards (5 out of 7) had overdue bills sent to collections, sometimes 
incredibly quickly. Multiple people reported having bills sent to collections “within weeks” of a missed 
payment, while others reported being sent to collections within 6 months. One respondent shared they 
have been unable to find a place to live because of the impact of going to collections on their credit 
score.  
When asked if they felt like using these products made their situation better, worse, or the same 
responses were split. Many people said they felt like using a medical credit card made their situation 
better “for an immediate solution” (i.e., they felt better because they were able to access much needed 
care), but others shared they had mixed feelings. To quote one respondent, “I was desperate, so it 
seemed fine at the time, but I’m in the same situation I am now when I first got it, so in a way it's worse 
because I now don’t have that option.” It appears to us that specialty medical payment products 
currently provide a quick and much-needed route to care that has become inaccessible due to high 
costs, confusing insurance plan designs, and difficulties accessing financial assistance. As one survey 
respondent said, “I have no other way to pay the outrageous prices, but I don’t like the idea of 
needing a credit card just to get medical/dental treatment.” 
Overall, people expressed relief at feeling they had another option to pay for care but felt concerned 
that specialty medical payment products were the most accessible of multiple difficult options. The 
responses shared by our beneficiaries paint a picture of a health care system that is dense and difficult 
to navigate, with very few guideposts along the way. One respondent succinctly summarized what it is 
like to navigate the health care space:  
This experience is so challenging. What you don’t know to ask, where to/how to receive 
assistance, to be dependent on other people on the inside (so to speak) to willingly, forthrightly 
share information/point you in the right direction is ultimately frightening.  
As it stands, specialty medical payment products have the potential to be a valuable tool in easing the 
burden of accessing health care; however, without necessary guardrails like clear patient education, 
banning deferred interest, and other suggestions laid out in this document, these products have a high 
likelihood of making an already complex and intricate system to navigate even more difficult.  
II. CFPB-Specific Questions 
What actions should the CFPB consider taking to address problematic practices related to medical 
credit cards or loans, including debt collection and credit reporting practices? 
The CFPB should ban financial institutions and vendors from offering and promoting deferred interest 
credit cards or loans in health care settings and for health care services, including dental and vision 
services; and limit the amount of interest that can be charged on elective procedures. The CFPB has 

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 10
 
authority to address problematic practices related to medical credit cards or loans.7 As advocates have 
said in their past comments, “Section 102(a) of the [Credit Card, Accountability, Responsibility and 
Disclosures Act of 2009] prohibits double-cycle billing, which is inherent in deferred-interest credit cards 
when consumers are subjected to a finance charge based on balances from prior billing periods if they 
do not pay their balance in full during the promotional period. In addition, Section 101(b) of the CARD 
Act prohibits the retroactive application of interest rate increases, which is also an inherent feature of 
deferred-interest credit cards.” 
Even if the CFPB does not instate a total ban on these products, it should limit how and where medical 
credit cards and installment loans can be marketed to patients. We are particularly concerned about 
point-of-service marketing in health care offices. The prospect of providers offering risky financial 
products to patients while they are in the middle of a health crisis is concerning. A patient who feels 
they must choose between a potentially predatory high-interest medical credit card and not receiving 
chemotherapy, for example, is not being presented with a fair choice. We believe guardrails are 
necessary to protect patients in these challenging situations to ensure providers are first offering 
patients less risky methods to pay down debt such as financial assistance for low-income and medically 
indigent patients, or zero-interest payment plans. Limitations on credit card marketing exist in other 
contexts. For example, tabling by credit card companies on college campuses has been forbidden.  As a 
model, the CFPB should look at California Senate Bill 639 of 2019, which prohibits providers from 
arranging for or establishing an open-end credit or loan with a deferred interest provision.  
We also believe that CFPB should require financial institutions and vendors that offer credit or loan 
products in medical contexts to provide evidence of “heightened informed consent” so that patients 
know all the potential financial side effects that come from signing up for a medical credit card.  In 
clinical contexts, heightened informed consent is used for medical procedures deemed especially 
injurious or sensitive, such as sterilization or HIV testing. Because of the financial risks patients 
undertake with deferred medical credit cards, in particular, any financial services vendor that is offering 
these products should be required to demonstrate that they have helped patients understand the risks 
and that patients have first exhausted other options, including screening for coverage or charity care. 
Companies that offer credit or loan products in a health care context or for health services should be 
required to also give patients information about other options for paying for care, including notice about 
eligibility and application processes for public coverage programs, premium assistance, or financial 
assistance. People should also be provided a “cooling-off period” where they can retract their consent 
for these products while maintaining their access to care. 
 
7 15 U.S.C. § 1637(j) (prohibiting double-cycle billing); 15 U.S. Code § 1666i–1 (prohibiting retroactive rate 
increases). See generally Wu, C. “Deceptive Bargain: The Hidden Time Bomb of Deferred Interest Credit Cards” 
(December 2015). National Consumer Law Center. Accessed September 11, 2023 at https://www.nclc.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/09/report-deferred-interest.pdf.  

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 11
 
Finally, CFPB should work with HHS and Treasury to develop and implement data collection strategies 
for medical debt, including medical debt on typical credit cards, so that the public can see and 
understand trends in medical debt at the individual and population level. 
How can the CFPB use its authorities to ensure people with medical bills in collections, including 
medical payment product debt, are screened for eligibility for financial assistance and other benefits? 
CFPB’s own analyses show that the majority of medical credit products are offered in dental, visual, 
audiology settings, or with specialty providers who are often not bound by state or federal financial 
assistance, billing or collection requirements. That said, there is growing and valid concern that hospitals 
are leveraging medical payment products to address the accelerating issue of unpaid medical bills, 
increase revenues, and ease the burden of administering interest-free payment plans. We urge CFPB 
and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to collaborate and issue joint guidance reiterating that patients 
should be screened prior to any credit card or high-interest installment loan offer. Credit card 
companies are running income verification and should easily be able to identify income eligibility for a 
hospital’s financial assistance policy. In addition, financial companies should ensure that if a person is 
found eligible for hospital financial assistance or interest-free payment plans after signing up for a 
medical credit card, they are able to extract themselves from their contractual obligation. 
How are health care providers and financial companies using credit or “propensity to pay” scores to 
determine patients’ eligibility for financial assistance or medical payment products? What are the 
implications for compliance with the Fair Credit Reporting Act or other CFPB authorities?  
A growing number of companies sell revenue cycle tools that larger health care systems use to manage 
billing and collections. These companies, which include Experian, RevCo, Waystar and FinThrive,8 offer 
software solutions that can help providers triage and screen patients for financial assistance, Medicaid, 
and other means-tested programs. These software solutions can also be used to help health care 
providers make decisions about where to focus collections activities. While the specific data inputs used 
for these software programs are not typically public, using algorithms to determine a patient’s 
“propensity to pay”—that is, whether a patient is likely to pay their bill and not necessarily whether they 
are able to afford their bill—is a well-known strategy.9  
 
8 RIP Medical Debt partners with FinThrive to abolish medical debt.  
9 See, e.g., “Increasing Collections By Acting on Predictions of Propensity to Pay.” HealthCatalyst. Accessed 
September 11, 2023 at https://www.healthcatalyst.com/success_stories/predicting-propensity-to-pay-allina-
health#PREDICTING-PROPENSITY-TO-PAY. For a contrasting industry approach that delineates between ability to 
pay and propensity to pay, see also Gupta, C. “Propensity to pay vs. ability to pay: what’s the difference?” PayZen 
(March 15, 2023). Accessed September 11, 2023 at Propensity to pay vs. ability to pay: what’s the difference? – 
PayZen.  

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 12
 
Presumptive eligibility software could be a powerful tool to direct eligible patients into financial 
assistance and Medicaid programs, while minimizing effort from providers.10 However, we are 
concerned that some providers and financial companies may be using “propensity to pay” scores 
inappropriately. Approaches that use a “propensity to pay” score instead of or prior to screening 
patients for hospital financial assistance or Medicaid eligibility—both of which are typically based on 
income—can penalize low- and middle-income people who have a history of paying their bills on time. 
We urge CFPB to monitor revenue cycle products and, in partnership with HHS, to develop guidelines 
for health care providers and financial companies that use data analytics to streamline eligibility 
determinations for means-tested programs and medical payment products.  
When hospitals write off a patient’s debt as uncollectible or “bad debt” and cease attempts to collect, 
do they notify patients that collection attempts will cease? Would patients benefit from such 
notifications, and would such notifications reduce hospital revenue? 
A “bad debt” classification typically occurs after providers have attempted to screen patients for 
eligibility for Medicaid or their own financial assistance policies. Most hospitals do not inform patients 
whose accounts are classified as “bad debt” that attempts to collect will cease. The reasons for lack of 
notification are multifaceted. Some providers or collectors may desire to leave the door open for 
patients with “bad debt” accounts to make a payment in the future, even if this is statistically unlikely to 
occur. Of greater concern, however, is the lack of notification to patients who have been found 
eligible for financial assistance through presumptive eligibility screening tools. These patients are 
rarely informed that they have qualified for financial help and can still receive bills, even though the 
account has been classified as charity care. We encourage hospitals to notify patients when charity care 
– whether full or partial – is awarded.  
III. HHS-Specific Questions  
 What actions should HHS consider taking to address problematic practices related to medical credit 
cards or loans, particularly as they relate to patients eligible for or enrolled in Medicare, Medicaid, or 
the Children’s Health Insurance Program, or patients enrolled in Affordable Care Act Marketplace 
plans? 
While recent improvements to ACA subsidies have made health insurance more affordable, too many 
people continue to struggle with high out-of-pocket costs. The questions raised in this RFI demonstrate 
the high level of complexity and financial literacy required to navigate our health care system. HHS 
should continue to invest in Navigators, restart investment in Consumer Assistance Programs (CAPs) and 
identify other assistance pathways that can help people avoid medical debt. This should include the 
launch of new learning modules for Navigators and other enrollment assisters about financial assistance 
 
10 See, e.g., ______. “The Patient as the New Payer: Five Opportunities to Improve the Patient Financial 
Experience” (suggesting providers use propensity-to-pay tools to route patients to financial assistance). Healthcare 
Financial Management Association (February 10, 2023). Accessed September 11, 2023 at 
https://www.hfma.org/revenue-cycle/patients-as-payers-five-ways-to-improve-the-patient-experience/.  

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 13
 
programs, consumer protections available to prevent medical debt, and other financial alternatives that 
can support low- and middle-income people who need help managing their medical bills.  
In addition to supporting patient navigation and education, HHS should:  
• 
Analyze and report on the insurance denial rates for ACA, private and public plans to better 
understand how patients are financially impacted. The ACA requires reporting by all non-
grandfathered employer-sponsored health insurance plans and by non-group plans sold on and 
off the ACA marketplaces. Patients rarely appeal insurance denials and many just absorb the 
costs of care without question.11 Data show that Medicaid insurers are routinely denying claims 
as part of their business practices, even when said claims should be covered. However, to date, 
HHS has arguably underused this data to provide oversight of insurance plans or to create 
market analyses consumers can use to select their health care plans. 
• 
Closely monitor billing practices for Medicaid patients and ensure they are protected from 
unnecessary credit card financing options. Medicaid is prohibited from balance billing for 
services that Medicaid covers, meaning the provider cannot charge patients more than what 
Medicaid paid unless there is a written agreement with the patient to pay more than the 
Medicaid contracted rate or for a noncovered Medicaid service. The exception is for applicable 
Medicaid co-payments. Patients should regularly be informed of this protection. 
• 
Encourage the use of technology (such as presumptive eligibility systems) to automatically 
qualify eligible patients for financial assistance, Medicaid/CHIP, or Marketplace coverage. 
Presumptive eligibility for hospital financial assistance as well as benefits programs can help 
significantly mitigate the harm of medical debt by guiding people towards the care and support 
they need.  
• 
Issue guidance on Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, clarifying that translation and interpreter 
requirements apply to financial conversations as well as clinical conversations. Anecdotally, 
we have received stories of medical credit cards targeting individuals with limited English 
proficiency who did not understand they were signing up for a credit card—indeed, some 
people report thinking they were signing up for health insurance. In our recent comments to 
HHS on the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking for Section 1557 of the ACA, we argue that medical 
billing is a health care activity that should be subject to the same non-discrimination 
requirements that apply to clinical care.  
Are there particular health care provider types that are most associated with being offered or offering 
medical payment products, and are these providers receiving directed payments or other incentives 
through State Medicaid programs? 
 
11CMS data indicates that 17% of in-network claims were denied for plans purchased through healthcare.gov. The 
analysis highlights patients’ low rates of appealing these denials: healthcare.gov patients appealed less 1% of 
denied in-network claims. See Pollitz, K., et al. “Claims Denials and Appeals in ACA Marketplace Plans in 2021.“ 
Kaiser Family Foundation (February 9, 2023). Accessed September 11, 2023 at https://www.kff.org/private-
insurance/issue-brief/claims-denials-and-appeals-in-aca-marketplace-plans/.  

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 14
 
Evidence suggests these products are being used predominantly in primary and dental care settings—
places that often serve as access points to other types of specialty care.  It seems excepted benefits 
under the ACA (including adult dental, vision, and long-term care) are also common venues for these 
products. Since coverage is limited, patients in need of these benefits often face challenges in finding 
ways to pay—dental benefits are ripe for credit card offerings, particularly when insurance fails to cover 
anything more complex than cleanings. The ACA authorizes HHS to “periodically review the essential 
health benefits ...and provide a report to Congress and the public.” In a letter to HHS in July 2023, health 
advocates highlighted that HHS has yet to conduct such a review and report to Congress. Numerous 
studies show the importance of dental care and its relationship to overall health status, and dental care 
is cited as the most commonly deferred service. Indeed, according to Kaiser Family Foundation, about 4 
in 10 people have delayed seeking medical and dental care due to cost. HHS should take steps to 
review existing benefits and revise the EHB to include dental services to ensure people can afford these 
important services without incurring major medical debt.  
 
How might HHS improve patient understanding of options for covering the cost of medical 
treatments? At what points in the care process could patients be provided with information about 
their financial obligations and payment options? 
 
HHS could include the issue of how to pay for medical treatment in currently funded initiatives 
supporting the community and public health workforce. These multi-year grants already support 
training of community health workers, navigators, peer counselors and other non-clinical patient 
support roles. Curricula could include how to support clients with medical debt; how to apply for 
financial assistance or negotiate favorable payment plans with providers; and the role of medical debt as 
a social determinant of health and known barrier to care.   
 
IV. Treasury-specific questions 
What policy actions should Treasury consider taking to address problematic practices related to 
medical credit cards or loans, including debt collection and credit reporting practices, to conform with 
the existing tax laws and regulations pertaining to tax-exempt hospitals?  
First, Treasury should amend the regulatory definition of what constitutes a “reasonable effort” to 
require hospitals and third-party vendors to conduct a full screening and eligibility determination for 
financial assistance prior to offering or directing patients to a medical payment product, including low-
interest loans.12 Steps required could include conducting a presumptive eligibility screen for financial 
assistance; communicating the outcome of that screening to the patient; and providing the patient with 
an opportunity and staff support to submit a full application for financial help if a presumptive screen 
proves inconclusive or negative.  
 
 
12 See 26 U.S.C. § 501(r)(6) and 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(r)-6, Billing and Collections.  

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 15
 
Second, Treasury should require hospitals to notify patients who have been found eligible for full 
financial assistance using presumptive eligibility tools. Currently, the Code requires hospitals that use 
presumptive eligibility tools to notify patients only when a presumptive screen finds the patient is either 
ineligible for financial assistance, or just qualifies for partial help.13 It is silent about notice to patients 
who are found eligible for full free care through a presumptive screen. In response, most hospitals do 
not notify patients that receive full financial assistance through a presumptive screen. This creates 
uncertainty for patients, who may believe they still owe money. Indeed, some patients who have 
received financial assistance according to the hospital’s records have reported that they still receive 
bills.  
 
Should a tax-exempt hospital’s signing patients up for medical payment products be considered 
similar to a tax-exempt hospital’s selling medical debt, such that the special rules that only exclude 
debt sales from being extraordinary collection actions if certain requirements are met would be 
applied to these payment products?  
We find it difficult to see how this exception would be workable or sufficiently protective for a patient 
that has signed up for a deferred interest credit card. This is one reason why we believe deferred 
interest medical credit cards should be banned outright. However, a narrow exception could arguably be 
made for interest-free or low-interest payment plans that 1) take into account a patient’s ability to pay; 
2) require the hospital and third-party vendor to both demonstrate that they have proactively screened 
the patient for eligibility for financial assistance and any coverage programs; 3) provide the patient with 
a meaningful opportunity to apply for financial assistance and coverage programs; and 4) allow for 
cancellation and reimbursement to the patient if the patient is later found to qualify for financial 
assistance.  
How do tax-exempt hospitals’ promotion of medical payment products compare to their 
operationalization of the requirement that their financial assistance policies be widely publicized?  
The current requirements outline four key strategies tax-exempt hospitals must use to widely publicize 
their financial assistance policies.14 Broadly speaking, hospitals must make information about financial 
assistance available online through the hospital’s website; through paper copies available at the 
facilities; through broad community outreach; and by providing a plain language summary of the 
financial assistance policy directly to patients. In our experience, most tax-exempt hospitals meet the 
requirements related to posting information about financial assistance on their websites. While we do 
see hospitals commingling financial assistance with information about prompt-pay discounts or interest-
free payment plans, in our experience it is not yet common for a tax-exempt hospital to advertise a 
medical credit card or high-interest bank loan. 
It is less clear how hospitals are complying with the last three elements. Understanding how effective 
hospitals are at reaching patients and community members directly requires community insight, 
 
13 Ibid.  
14 See 26 U.S.C. § 501(r)(4) and 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(r)-4, Financial assistance policy and emergency medical care 
policy. 

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 16
 
knowledge, and access to patient billing materials.15 One thing that does seem clear: despite these 
notice requirements, many patients are still unaware that financial assistance exists. In a survey report 
we conducted with nonprofit financial services provider Neighborhood Trust of beneficiaries and low to 
moderate-income workers, financial assistance is poorly understood and largely underutilized. The 
beneficiaries we surveyed routinely noted how difficult it is to get accurate, easily digestible information 
on their billing options and rights. Patients find themselves in complex medical situations with complex 
bills and must rely on overburdened billing staff to explain their options. Of note, 57% of respondents 
were not aware of financial assistance programs, over 44% of respondents never tried to apply for 
financial assistance, and 12% could not figure out how to apply. To date, we are unaware of any large-
scale public studies that have looked at how tax-exempt hospitals are implementing requirements to 
notify patients about financial assistance in their facilities, through direct communication, and through 
community outreach. This may be an area where Treasury can conduct or direct further study. 
Treasury can also look to states that have instituted higher standards for notifying and qualifying eligible 
patients about hospital financial assistance.16 For example, the state of Illinois requires hospitals to 
accept enrollment in several public programs as "presumptive eligibility" for financial assistance, 
including Medicaid, SNAP, WIC, and enrollment or referral from federally qualified health centers and 
community access programs that use income as an eligibility criteria. Illinois’ approach illustrates the 
creative ways states and communities can leverage other means-tested programs to quickly move 
people to financial assistance efficiently and compassionately. 
What are best practices for hospitals publishing and making patients aware of financial assistance 
programs (beyond compliance with the widely publicized requirements found in the section 501(r) 
regulations)?   
RIP Medical Debt works with many hospitals that actively seek to improve how their financial assistance 
policies are implemented and shared with local communities. We encourage providers to make it as 
easy for patients to find out about and apply for financial assistance as it is for them to pay their bill. 
Good practices include having information about financial assistance no more than “two clicks” into the 
website. We also recommend providers include information about financial assistance in all patient 
 
15 One potential area for monitoring or improvement would be translation. 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(r)-4(b)(5)(ii) requires 
hospitals that serve patient groups over a certain size (1,000 people or 5% of the hospital’s community, whichever 
is less) with limited English proficiency groups by translating the financial assistance policy, plain language 
summary, and application form into languages other than English. While it is common to find the plain language 
summary of a financial assistance policy translated into languages other than English on a hospital’s website, it is 
rarer to find translated versions of the application and full policy. 
16 The Commonwealth Fund recently issued a helpful new survey of laws in all 50 states related to medical debt 
that compares existing state law to the requirements found in Section 501(r). Kona, M. and Raimugia, V. ”State 
Protections Against Medical Debt: A Look Policies Across US.” Commonwealth Fund (September 7, 2023). Accessed 
September 11, 2023 at https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/fund-reports/2023/sep/state-
protections-medical-debt-policies-across-us.   

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 17
 
billing statements. Any pull-out statements that direct patients to call the billing department to pay a 
balance or set up a payment plan can and should inform patients that they may be eligible for help.  
To expedite the process for patients and staff, hospitals should adopt and implement a “no wrong door” 
approach to financial assistance. This requires hospitals to routinely offer updates and trainings to new 
hires and existing staff to ensure that everyone who interacts with patients—from social workers to 
nurses and clinicians, to financial services and vendor staff—know financial assistance is available and 
where they can direct patients to the appropriate personnel. Revenue cycle staff and vendors should be 
trained to screen patients for coverage options and financial assistance first, before offering a payment 
plan or financing product so patients have timely information about their financial options. Finally, we 
encourage our hospital partners to talk with their community partners. Local community partners have 
important lived expertise that allows them to better understand how accessible hospital financial 
assistance policies and application materials truly are, where they could be strengthened, and the best 
strategies for communicating directly with patients and the broader community.  
Patients are inevitably going to fall through the cracks, which is why we encourage providers to think 
through improvements they can make to their financial assistance process—including automating the 
application process, reducing staff workloads and increasing the number of patients who can apply and 
get assistance. While these recommendations technically apply to other sections of 501(r), we include 
them here because we believe they are an important backstop to helping patients access financial help. 
They include:  
• 
Increasing hospital financial assistance eligibility levels to meet community need and 
expanding policies to include patients who are underinsured. According to the American 
Hospital Association, a typical hospital financial assistance policy offers full free care to patients 
earning at or below 200% of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL).17 Yet most of the debt we abolish 
at RIP Medical Debt is for patients with incomes between 150-350% of the Federal Poverty 
Level—including patients with insurance—and just over a quarter of all debt we abolish 
stemming from people whose incomes are between 150-200% FPL.  This is a sizable gap 
between current hospital policies and community needs, particularly for people whose 
moderate incomes make them ineligible for a local hospital’s financial assistance policy but who 
have high health care costs or struggle with underinsurance.18 Currently their only recourse may 
be a loan, which can drain savings, or a credit card arrangement. In addition to adopting some of 
 
17 American Hospital Association, “Fact Sheet: Medical Debt” (June 2023) Accessed September 11, 2023 at 
https://www.aha.org/system/files/media/file/2023/06/fact-sheet-medical-debt.pdf  
18 The Commonwealth Fund defines underinsurance as having out-of-pocket costs, excluding premiums, that 
exceed 10% of household income in the previous 12 months for people over 200% FPL, or that exceed 5% of 
household income for people under 200% FPL; or having a deductible that exceeds 5% of household income. By 
this measure, approximately 23% of all American adults under the retirement age of 65 were underinsured last 
year.  See, e.g. Collins, S., et al.” The State of U.S. Health Insurance in 2022: Findings from the Commonwealth 
Fund Biennial Health Insurance Survey.” Commonwealth Fund (September 29, 2022). Accessed September 11, 
2023 at https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/issue-briefs/2022/sep/state-us-health-insurance-2022-
biennial-survey  

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 18
 
the best practices for screening and notification above, hospitals should revisit their eligibility 
levels. 
• 
Allowing interest-free payment plans for patients or guarantors below 400% FPL or who have 
at least 5% income tied up in medical debt. Higher-income people also struggle with bills, and 
an interest-free or low-interest payment plan from their provider can be a better way to 
structure payment than credit. To work for patients, these payment plans should also be 
structured in installments the patient or guarantor can afford to pay.  
• 
Investing in technology that streamlines the financial assistance application process for 
patients and staff. This includes 1) expanding the use of presumptive eligibility tools that can 
speed up a determination of eligibility for financial assistance or public coverage programs and 
2) creating a platform that allows patients to submit and track their financial assistance 
applications online. This could be as simple as linking the financial assistance application to the 
BillPay section of a patient’s online medical record, such as MyChart. Ideally these programs are 
used for every patient, not just uninsured patients, who may have difficulty paying a bill.  
• 
Removing questions about patient assets from financial assistance applications. Applications 
for hospital financial assistance commonly ask patients to list assets like primary residences, 
cars, and various bank accounts, even though many eligibility determinations are based simply 
on a patient’s or guarantor’s income. Community partners and our beneficiaries have repeatedly 
shared examples of how including questions about assets in an application can have a chilling 
effect for patients who should have qualified for financial assistance, but never finished an 
application out of fear a key asset—their primary residence or car, retirement or education 
fund—would be seized. A better approach is to limit the application to information about 
patient income and medical indigence or underinsurance.   
• 
Removing requests for personal identifying information, like Social Security numbers (SSNs), 
or making them optional. Many hospital financial assistance applications require patients to 
provide SSNs to aid staff in identifying whether the patient is eligible for Medicaid or other 
programs. Community partners have shared how this seemingly reasonable request can chill 
applications from people who lack an SSN. We recommend providers omit the SSN or, if 
including it, clarify on the form how it will be used (e.g., to screen patients for Medicaid)--and 
make it optional on the application form.  
 
Does the availability of medical payment products generally benefit the community or assist patients 
financially? 
Although medical payment products may assist certain patients, we do not believe it is appropriate for 
these products to be defined as “community benefit,” even when they are offered at zero- or low-
interest. First, community benefit should be reserved for financial assistance policies that absolve the 
patient of outstanding debt if they are unable to pay. Medical payment products, with the exception of 
zero-interest payment plans, generate profit for the financial services provider that now owns the debt. 
While providers may not be profiting from the exchange, treating these products as community benefit 
could further create perverse disincentives to enroll people who should be eligible for financial 

 
 
 
RIP Medical Debt, p. 19
 
assistance for payment plans to increase revenue. Second, many of these medical payment products 
offer better terms, including lower interest rates, for people with better credit. While that might make 
perfect sense in the financial services sector, it is antithetical to the original purpose and intent of 
community benefit.  
V. Conclusion  
We are grateful for the intentionality with which the Treasury, HHS, and Consumer Financial Protection 
Bureau are approaching the issue of medical payment products. On behalf of our beneficiaries, thank 
you for your work. We look forward to next steps. Please reach out to Eva Stahl, Vice President of Public 
Policy (eva.stahl@ripmedicaldebt.org) with any questions. 
 
 
Regards, 
 
Allison Sesso 
President & CEO, RIP Medical Debt 
