 
MERCHANT TRANSPARENCY GUIDELINES  
United Credit promotes full transparency and disclosure to all applicants. To assure that applicants are not 
mislead and are aware of key information about United Credit, you hereby agree as follows:  
● United Credit works with multiple lenders to offer closed end, unsecured, personal 
installment loans to borrowers.  
● No person on your staff who has not completed training for the United Credit program will discuss 
the program with prospective borrowers.  
● You and your staff will not make any implied or overt promises that an applicant will be approved 
for a loan through United Credit  
● You and your staff will not quote any particular interest rate, term, or other loan feature to a 
prospective borrower with United Credit  
● You and your staff agree you will print adverse action notices at the request of the prospective 
borrower.  
● You will direct all potential applicants to apply directly through the United Credit application by 
providing them an application link via the merchant portal OR with a United Credit brochure that 
includes our website application link.  
● You will not suggest/direct patients/clients who are under duress (general sedation, in extreme 
discomfort, or heavily medicated) to apply through United Credit  
● You will not suggest/direct patients/clients to apply with United Credit if you have reason to believe 
they are intending to commit fraud.  
● You will direct all patient/client inquiries about the program or their loan to United Credit for 
handling or referral to the appropriate lender as applicable.  
● You will accept United Credit loan proceeds only for those costs incurred or services rendered within 
30 days of receipt of funds. If services are not rendered within 30 days, the borrower has the right to 
an automatic refund from you for services not yet rendered.  
● You will maintain a fair refund policy and will advise all patients/clients of your policy.  
● Comply with all United Credit policies and procedures and all applicable local, state and federal laws 
and regulations, including non-discrimination laws and the customer’s right of rescission  
● United Credit reserves the right to monitor your adherence to these and other United Credit policies. 
Providers who violate these policies will be subject to chargebacks as well as potential termination 
from the program 
