
Re: Request for Information Regarding Specialty Medical Payment Products Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 1700 G Street NW Washington, DC 20552
Assistive technology helps to meet the medical need of a person who has a disability or a medical condition.  A modified vehicle is a form of assistive technology that helps to address the medical needs for those who rely on private transportation to get themselves to their jobs, medical appointments and to commute within their communities.  
The 2017 National Household Travel Survey, indicates that 25.5 million people over age five report disabilities that limit their ability to travel [2]. Of these, 11.6% use a manual wheelchair, 3.9% use power wheelchairs, and 4.4% use scooters, indicating that about 5 million people use wheeled mobility devices in the USA. Many of these people own modified vehicles. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8835052/
There are limited modified vehicle dealerships nationally that address this volume of assistive technology by providing modified vehicles. There is not significant competition within this industry, and it is thought that price gouging is a common practice among these dealerships. There are reports of modified caravans selling for $120,000. When competition is limited, there is little opportunity for cost comparison. On top of that, many dealers advertise interest at 4%, when in fact, many of the vehicle purchase loans are issued at 18% or higher with repayment terms that may be up to 10 or 15 years. Such selling points and terms make these vehicles unaffordable.
Modified vehicle sites list wheelchair accessible vehicles, that have more than 150,000 miles with modifications having been done more than 10 years ago, starting at a selling price of $40,000 or more. What is the true value of those vehicles that had those modifications completed ten or more years ago? Conventional financing through banks and credit unions is not available for modified vehicles when the blue-book value does not equate to the vehicle’s base value. This AT vendor financing leads to lending terms with interest rates from 18% to 30% with extended repayment terms of up to 10 or 15 years.
Facilities that provide hand-control conversion of vehicles are even more limited. There are hand control assessments and costs that range from $1,200 - $30,000 to $60,000 or more. The limited competition again results in hand control conversion interest rates at 18% or more. Even for people who have credit scores in the range of 720 to 825, interest rates are commonly offered at 18% interest or higher. 
There are also instances when modified vehicles are sold, without reasonable repairs being done prior to sale. Some consumers purchase extended warranties or rely on pre-purchase evaluations in an effort to protect themselves when purchasing a modified vehicle, adding more cost to the purchase. 


Recommendation: There should be a standard appraised value for common vehicle modification features. Modifications that were completed years ago should be subject to depreciation. Kelly Blue Book should address these values within their auto guide; this could help customers know the value of modified vehicles. 

There are many other forms of assistive technology (AT) such as hearing or vision aids that may or may not be included within health care policies. Many times, AT vendors rely on CareCredit or other finance companies that offer 0% interest for up to 6 months. For customers who qualify for this line of credit, who manage to pay on time each of those 6 months, that works out fine. But, if a payment is missed or the loan is not paid in full within 6 months, an interest rate of 18% is applied upon the original loan amount, dated back to the date of loan / credit origination. This practice makes AT, a form of a medical product, unaffordable.

Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments!

Respectfully Submitted, Laurie Schaller
Manager Financial Empowerment
National Disability Institute, Assistive Technology Loan Program / New Jersey and New York